+++
title = "Frenchman's Cap"
date = 2017-01-17
slug = "frenchmans-cap"
[extra]
gallery = "photos/frenchmans-cap-2016/"
banner_image = "photos/frenchmans-cap-2016/20170103_144142.jpg"
[taxonomies]
categories = ["Adventures"]
tags = ["maps"]
authors = ["Luke Frisken"]
+++

With the Christmas/New Year period shutdown at work, there was a scramble
to find something interesting to do. Luckily some good friends were
already off to Tasmania to go hiking, and had a spare spot in their car.
A few days before leaving we decided on doing the Frenchman's Cap walk
due to the uncertainty of road access in other areas of Tasmania from
flooding and damage.

So, on the last day of December 2016 we walked in on the first section
of the Frenchman's cap walk, keeping an eye out for any camp site which
could give a view of the southern sky, for there was araura activity
forecast for that night.

Exploration around the top of the first hill led to an area was far from
flat, filled with large tussocks, so we pressed down on into the valley.
Eventually I found some hills which, while a little grassy would have
been fairly comfortable, and had a great view. Group decision was to
continue down to the marked camp site next to the Loddon River. I was a
little disapointed, but as the sky grew overcast, perhaps it wasn't such
a bad option.

In proper MUMC style, we had carried in a fair amount of celebratory and
luxurious foods (by bushwalking standards\!). Luckily, we had Dan who
was heading back out the next day, to carry the rubbish/compost back out
for us.

Initially the plan was to follow the route described in [John Chapman's
book](http://www.john.chapman.name/pub-sw.html), after reaching
Frenchmans, crossing the Franklin river and heading north to meet the
road again where we had parked our second car. I also had my eye on a
number of the side trips to the wouth of Lake Vera, and around Barron
Pass.

This plan was altered throughout the trip, to the point where we ended
up having a rather leisurely 5 day trip in and back out of Frenchman's
cap, one that could quite easily have been done in 3\! I really enjoyed
it, but next time would like to go with a slightly more exciteable/crazy
crew to do the exposed/scrambly/bush-bashy side trips and complete the
loop.

Also made another map for this trip using data from the Tasmanian
Government, and OpenStreetMap:

[![Two Page A3 Map PDF **(click image to open
pdf)**](/files/maps/FrenchmansCapA3.jpg)](/files/maps/FrenchmansCapA3.pdf)

![Cradle Mountain skyline. Image credit Bjørn Christian Tørrissen from
<http://bjornfree.com/galleries.html>](/images/external_photos/Cradle_Mountain_And_Barn_Bluff.jpg)

On the way back the Launceston, we stopped by Cradle Mountain for a day.
I left the others in search of adventure after spying out the fantastic
ridge across the skyline. With no internet to check [thesarvo's info on
the
place](http://www.thesarvo.com/confluence/display/thesarvo/Cradle+Mountain+-+Lake+St+Clair),
I just decided try a solo traverse of the ridge (from left to right in
the photo) and see how it goes.

The climbing up there is quite the fun experience, take care of the
occasional loose rock, just like any mountain, the views were stunning.
There are some awesome little pinnacles to climb on top of, giving you a
strong feeling of exposure. Some of the descents would be much easier
with ropes, and I opted to back off and traverse around one of the tops
guessing it led to a drop at the end after climbing it.

After reaching my turn-back time of 4pm, I decided to drop down one of
the gulleys to the right, which I could see led to easy ground. Little
streams ran down the gulleys, and a morraine runout reminded me of New
Zealand. I forgot to keep track of where I had come down, but the best
guess from the photo is maybe I made it 1/2 to 1/3 of the way to the
summit track.
