+++
title = "Ski Gear Review"
date = 2017-10-10
slug = "ski-gear-review"
gallery = "/photos/SkiingInNewZealand"
banner_image = "/photos/SkiingInNewZealand/20170724_130842.jpg"
draft = true
+++

This section is rather dry, and more stands for a reference for those
searching for information on the same products, feel free to skip\!

TODO: move this section to its own article.

In the lead up to the trip, I decided to buy a new pair of skis. My
current pair was a Fischer S-Bound 98 ski. Interestingly, Fischer have
enguaged in some misleading marketing, the sidecut of these skis is
really 69mm under foot, and the 98 is the maximum sidecut. Whereas, the
common way to refer to a ski width appears to be the sidecut under foot.
This ski has a pattern base, and is ideal for ski touring in most
Australian snow conditions, especially rolling hills. Unfortunately
research suggested that the ski width would be far from adequate in New
Zealand conditions. Something closer to 90mm would be ideal.

On top of the width problem, I also have the skis mounted with 7TM Tour
Telemark bindings. I'm not the most confident tele skier, and often find
myself resorting to parallel turns when the going gets tough, especially
when wearing a heavy backpack. New Zealand terrain is usually steeper
and more serious, and with this in mind, it seemed sensible to get some
Alpine Touring bindings and boots to accompany the new skis. Further
research into the issue revealed that dynafit Alpine Touring setups are
usually considerably lighter.

Initially I had a look around locally for the setup I was after.
Starting with the boots. The Dynafit TLT4 boots are touted as being good
for both skiing and ice climbing in crampons, so I wanted to try and
find a pair at least similar to those. First point of call was
[Bogong](http://www.bogong.com.au/) in Little Bourke Street, Melbourne.
I noticed that many of their boots on display were fairly old models,
and sizing options were limited, but had some great discounts. Trying a
few on, I couldn't find a pair that seemed exactly what I was after, but
the Bogong staff member suggested that I could buy and take a pair home
to walk around in, and return a week later if they didn't work out.

So that's what I did. The boots turned out not to be the best fit, and
rather heavy to walk in, so they got returned. Next was a visit to
[Bumps](https://bumps.com.au/). They had a great range of boots and
sizes. The prices were staggering, and chatting to the staff, it
appeared the low turnover rate of this stock brought about the higher
prices. The also are the only store in Melbourne that stocks the newer
model boots. Suffice to say, I didn't try any boots on, and went back to
square one.

Several recommendations online seemed to suggest that ordering from
<https://www.telemark-pyrenees.com/> could be a good option. They have a
good reputation, ship to Australia, and their range of boots, skis and
bindings is far better than any other store I've seen. The prices were
also better, almost half the price as buying here in Australia, shipping
included. So I decided to risk it, purchased some boots, skis, bindings
and skins from the store, along with an avalanche beacon and probe.

They all arrived unexpectedly quickly. Opening the box, out popped the
Dynastar Cham 98 2.0 skis, with Dynafit TLT Radical ST 2.0 bindings and
the bright green Dynafit Winter Guide boots. The first thing I noticed,
with surprise, was that the new skis, were lighter than my telemark
setup. The Fischer skis are very light, but the hunk of metal that is
the 7TM binding pretty much weighs more than the entire ski\!

Being only the second pair of skis that I have owned, or used for a
significant amount of time, I don't really feel qualified to pass
judgement in a comprehensive review. The bindings had no failures, and
only got iced up on one occasion. The skis themselves were comfortable
in every snow condition we encountered (ice, powder, hard packed powder,
etc). The boots, one of the rivets that holds the power strap in place
popped out because I was walking around without it done up and it got
caught on something.
