+++
title = "Bogong in August"
date = 2017-08-28
slug = "bogong-in-august"
gallery = "/photos/bogong-in-august-2017"
banner_image = "/photos/bogong-in-august-2017/20170827_154008.jpg"
[taxonomies]
categories = ["Adventures"]
tags = []
authors = ["Luke Frisken"]
+++

Mitch and I decided to head up to Bogong for the weekend
together. Walking up Eskdale on Saturday morning we hit the snow
surprisingly early, and after about an hour and a half of walking,
reached the hut, with blue skies above.

With a week's worth of baking in the sun and freezing on the north side
of the mountain it was appearing to be spring snow galore, and our warm
up (which ended up somehow being the steepest of the weekend), was
dropping in off the East side of Eskdale after had climbed above the
tree line. It was much fun.

![At the bottom of our first run off Eskdale
Spur](/photos/bogong-in-august-2017/20170826_132122.jpg)

With the snow looking to be stable, we opted to skin up the gully
towards Hell's Gap (instead of bootpacking back up to the ridge). It's a
little steep/tight in spots for comfortable skinning, but it was managed
in the end.

We sat and ate lunch, and the cloud began to close in. I had been hoping
we could take a look at the gully to the West of Staircase (Devil's
Door?), but descending from the summit with 5m visibility, something
along the lines of *"this is bad isn't it?" "yes it is bad\!"*, we
turned around before it got steep and made a beeline down the south face
instead.

With clouds drifting in and out, we spent the afternoon on a surprising
amount of secretly stashed fluffy stuff.

That night the hut was full of happy folk, and the snow flakes began to
fall, with what appeared to be 10cm by morning. I felt a little sorry
(and slightly amused) for our friends who had decided to explore the
concept of bivy bags on (and now under) the snow.

![Our campsite in the
morning](/photos/bogong-in-august-2017/20170827_095426.jpg)

In the morning I had a discussion with someone else who was at the hut.
I asked them whether they had ended up skiing the bowl we had been in
the day before, down from Hell's Gap. They replied that they hadn't, but
that it would be dangerous today because of the snow that had been
forecast to fall from the NW, which would collect snow in the bowl. The
bowl ranges from SE around to NW. So she certainly had a point. I wasn't
so sure about the wind direction given our current location's lack of
consistent tell-tale signs of wind direction, and stated that "it will
be interesting to see what the wind has been doing up the top", and the
conversation ended there. It was a good conversation to have, as it
doubled my attention to what was going on with the snow that day.

![The view from Eskdale Spur in the
morning](/photos/bogong-in-august-2017/20170827_110414.jpg)

As we skinned up Eskdale spur, I pointed out to Mitch my preference to
ski the open, face-like, North ridge we could see coming down between
the Staircase and Eskdale from the top of Eskdale. My thoughts were that
if the snow had come from the NW, this ridge would be a safer objective
than the other side of the mountain, and the popular SE facing gullies
we had skied the day before, which we were also contemplating today.
Another thought for this preference was that the wind now appeared to be
coming from the South, and so the chance the South side being cloudy,
and windy and unpleasant was stronger. But I did also consider in my
mind that with the wind now coming from the South, wind transported snow
on the North side would need to be carefully monitored as the day
progressed. I would like to work on being able to air these thoughts
more often with those I'm skiing with, and extracting their opinions
(and reasons) also as it seems that more communication on these things
is always better, and it enables mistakes to be found before decisions
are made.

Without reaching agreement, we decided to delay the decision until
reaching the top of Eskdale. As we approached the top, I stopped stopped
a few times on kick turns, to poke a hole to check how much snow had
accumulated on top of the melt/freeze base. At the maximum slope angle,
the drifts were fewer, and on average about 10cm of fresh snow between
where the icy crust was exposed. There were some small drifts of 20-30cm
near the top, growing larger by the minute from the wind.

It was getting windy on top, so a consensus quickly was reached to drop
down the North face from the top. In my memory, the main point was to
avoid the rock outcrops, and stick to the West side of the face where
there was a clear path, with the shallowest angle of descent. Stopping
several times on the way down, the snow conditions were identical to
what we had encountered on the way up the Eskdale ridge proper (to be
expected I guess, more or less the same aspect). In my head I was
mindful that if we stayed down too long, it may not be safe to return
the way we came if too much snow had been transported. I was also a
little concerned we would hit a dangerous patch of ice, but visibility
was good, and it was easy to stick to the small snow drifts and avoid
the ice.

![Down the West Face (Photo taken by
Mitch)](/photos/bogong-in-august-2017/20170827_104235.jpg)

We made it all the way down to between the trees, and had an absolute
blast. Upon climbing back up it was interesting to notice (and we talked
out loud about this) the naturally pinwheeling chunks of snow from some
of the outcrops, and from our tracks. This was from what I've learned, a
potential tell-tale sign of a loose/wet slide risk, but the lack of
moisture evident in the snow calmed the concern somewhat. Traversing
back to the face we had descended, avoiding the NW facing bowl (with the
pinwheeling chunks), we made our way back up to the summit. I snapped a
shot of some riders on the East side of the Staircase, tracks looking
glorious. Again, stopping to check at each zig/zag, the snow transport
conditions did not appear to have changed much.

Back on top of Eskdale, the wind was really howling, so we made a
beeline down to the Staircase to check out what the conditions were like
on the Staircase, particularly the gully on its West side again. It
would be fair to say that the snow at the top of the gully was very
similar to the face we had previously skied, perhaps somewhat more
scant, ice further down was a potential concern. Standing at the top,
the northerly entry face to the gully; "There doesn't look to be enough
new snow here to slide or dig a pit?" I said poking madly with my pole
in the 5-10cm of powder on top of ice in the drift at my feet. "The snow
looks better over on the other side" my partner said with his head
turned the other direction. "I'll just do a ski cut to see how things
are here, over to there on the ridge?" I said. He reluctantly agreed (or
held his tongue) and I rocketed off across the slope, clattering over a
couple of small icy patches, quickly realised that the wind transported
snow was not in any way a concern in this location. A rough patch of ice
upon reaching/stopping the ridge had me off my skis (which really need
to be set at a higher DIN...), sprawled on a knoll, how embarrassing,
probably the silliest thing I did all weekend. Too much gusto on the
slightly unnecessary ski cut?

Putting skis back on, a snowboarder on snowshoes walks up to us from
below, followed by their partner on skis. Mitch's belief that the better
snow was on the other side was confirmed by an enthusiastic
recommendation to follow in their tracks on the East side of the
Staircase.

![Mitch zooming down](/photos/bogong-in-august-2017/20170827_132703.jpg)

By this stage, I was content to go with that option and watched Mitch
drop in over the edge of the small cornice, and followed him down after
he had stopped in a suitable location. I slightly regret having not dug
a snow pit here before dropping, or discussed its merits more fully, as
there would have definitely been enough fresh snow at the top to have
done so, and quite possibly we may have gotten some results which would
have rendered entering the face at a more shallow location a sensible
(and somewhat less exciting) idea, or perhaps it would have been fine, I
guess we'll never know. We were keen to get the last run in for the day,
and apart from the small amount of loading visible near the top, with no
obvious signs of instability from the previous skiers or our own
observations, the level of risk appeared acceptable. The snow was harder
packed, and not quite as enjoyable as our previous run but still great
fun. Zooming down into the gully, in the back of my head was the thought
that perhaps the snow was was different enough to warrant stopping to
check it out further.

![Me zooming down (Photo taken by
Mitch)](/photos/bogong-in-august-2017/20170827_121436.jpg)

Anyhow, with the time for thought during the climb up, we aimed instead
for the shallow entry option further down the ridge, remembering the
adage that it's better to take the safest possible route on the way up.
Mitch also gave me several helpful tips for laying a good skin track.

Upon reaching the Staircase, finally got some use out of the ski
crampons lugged with me on several trips, we reached the point where the
ski poles departed the ridge and traversed the face. The wind was
howling at this point, and watching the climbers wade through the snow
ahead, it was obvious that wind transport was taking its effect, so I
opted conservatively to continue up the ridge a little further above the
pole line to where the slope was less inclined to begin our traverse
through the soft stuff.

![Sandpaper to the
face\!](/photos/bogong-in-august-2017/20170827_144249.jpg)

The wind was like sandpaper to face and hard to stand straight, but
excellent type 1.5 fun, we finally got down to Michell hut, where it was
sunny, and barely a breath of wind.

Getting home, it was interesting to see reports of a slide on the NE
side near the top of Eskdale, and realise that concerns were warranted,
but also that perhaps more could have been done for safety's sake.
Changing wind direction makes for confusing conditions, and some
assumptions don't hold for long\! I'm also now not such a big fan of how
safe travel techniques (leaving a decent separation distance between us
on avalanche terrain), renders natural conversation with your partners
about snow conditions (and route selection) as you notice them a more
difficult affair. It's certainly been worthwhile chatting and debriefing
with each other, so much to learn from such experiences\!
