+++
title = "Ski Touring and Hiking with Locus Map"
date = 2017-11-13
slug = "ski-touring-with-locus-map"
gallery = ""
image = ""
draft = true
+++

Over the past couple of years, I've been on the hunt for a smartphone
application for the Android platform which will perform the duties of a
GPS unit, allowing me to use my phone on trips with colour maps, and
keep the garmin gps as a backup.

First off, a friendly shout out to the Backcountry Navigator app, I used
this Android application for quite some time, and on many adventures. It
gets the job done for sure. I heard they are coming out with a new
version soon
(<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/2016384643/backcountry-navigator-xe-outdoor-gps-on-ios-and-an>),
which will be worth checking out.

Now, on to Locus Map. Locus Map is by far my favourite phone
application. The features list is huge; not only are there heaps of
features, but they are well organised, and appear to be carefully chosen
and implemented based on user feedback. In this article, I'll only touch
the tip of the iceberg with what is possible using Locus Map.

## Map Sources

The first thing you notice when interacting with Locus Map is the huge
array of map sources available to you.

### Worldwide

For decent coverage worldwide with a style which appears to me to
provide the best readability, the OpenTopoMap (under the OSM - Other
category) is brilliant. This map source is based on OpenStreetMap data,
which means you also have the opportunity to improve the map yourself if
required. It also has a web browser interface at
<http://opentopomap.org> which I often use while planning trips from
home.

\<insert image of opentopomap in the browser and on the phone\>

### Japan

Japan GSI Maps Standard topographic map, also available from a web user
interface

\<insert image of Japan GSI map in browser and on phone\>

### Tasmania

My locus map sources

Overlay hillshade howto

\<insert image of LIST in browser, and on phone\>

### New Zealand

LINZ NZ Topo Map

## Terrain Shading

One of the best features for ski touring available in Locus Map is the
ability to shade the areas on the map according to their slope angle,
highlighting areas according to their avalanche risk
