+++
title = "Skiing in Japan"
date = 2018-01-09
slug = "skiing-in-japan"
[extra]
gallery = "photos/skiing-in-japan"
banner_image = "photos/skiing-in-japan/20171226_155250.jpg"
[taxonomies]
categories = ["Adventures"]
tags = ["Japan", "Skiing"]
authors = ["Luke Frisken"]
+++

Slipping slippy\!\! I look up from my phone to see we are facing
sideways, no time to brace as we collide with the snow after performing
a complete turn. Nii-san and I look at each other, and I raise my
eyebrows; what just happened\!? The van makes some strange noises
pulling into a nearby carpark, but a quick inspection shows the damage
is minimal. A couple of mudguards need readjusting. "It's our lucky
day\!" we say. A handshake and embrace and we're off again down the road
to Niseko town. A few minutes down the road is a pile-up involving 1..
2.. 3.. 4 cars\! Most people drive slowly, so thankfully damage is
minor, but the ice on the roads requires extreme care. Tea from the
thermos in the Seicomart carpark to calm the nerves, and we're off
again.

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20180102_142703.jpg", caption="Nii-san telemarking in the Niseko
backcountry")}}

Nii-san, a Japanese man with long hair, glasses, and a big smile, is
older than he seems when you consider his activity. He is still
maintaining youth pursuing his outdoor passions. A keen rock climber and
backcountry skier, he has set up home in his campervan outside Setsu
Getsu Karou (Translated as Snow, Moon, Flower House or something like
that) near Kimobetsu for the season intending to go backcountry skiing
every other day. Nii-san knows the Chisenpuri and Niseko backcountry
area like the back of his hand. I am very thankful to have had the
opportunity to spend 2 days skiing with him, he is one of the
friendliest, funniest and most generous people I have met.

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20171224_190537.jpg", caption="Christmas cake in Setsu Getsu
Karou")}}

Setsu Getsu Karou is owned by Maiko ([Airbnb
Account](https://www.airbnb.com.au/users/show/54008226)), she and her
partner bought the small abandoned primary school (abandonded due to
declining population), and turned it into a local history museum. You
could easily spend two days wandering around its hallways and classrooms
observing the many photos and items on display, and I did in fact spend
an entire day doing this\! Maiko runs an airbnb with private and hostel
style rooms, along with a resteraunt with meals cooked by her in her
kitchen. She has three cute kids, whom I played basketball with and
observed their cooking skills. On Christmas eve I was the only guest
staying, so Maiko invited me for dinner with her family and her parents
who live in the house next door. From this point onwards I felt like I
was a part of the family. I was so taken by the place that before I had
left I booked another 4 day stay for later in the trip.

A few months previously, while hunting around online for people to go
backcountry skiing with in Hokkaido, a friend put me onto Couchsurfing,
a website where people volunteer a place for a stranger to sleep, in
return for conversation, experiences and cultural exchange. On this
website it is easy to find people with similar interests who are willing
to meet a stranger and show them their home, and as I found, especially
when your interests are as specific as backcountry skiing. There were
only a few people in the Hokkaido area on couchsurfing with backcountry
skiing listed as an interest. I messaged all of them, asking not so much
whether I could stay at their home (for accomodation was not the primary
concern), but rather whether I could go out skiing with them.

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20171228_110428.jpg", caption="Yuki skiing at Rusutsu")}}

One of the people who replied was Yuki. She had the following statement
on her profile "You need your fat ski, a beacon, a probe, a shovel and
expert skills of skiing if possible... no ski no life". I wondered
whether I would be up to her standard\! She offered to have me stay with
her and her husband in Sapporo for a few nights. I could join them for
skiing during the day. She let me know that her English skills were not
very good, but I was very happy to have someone to ski with.

When it came to meeting Yuki, I drove from Setsu Getsu Karou towards
Kiroro, but a message from Yuki said that the destination had changed
due to conditions and we would now meet at Teine. As I got out of the
car in Teine, I realised with a shock that I had left my skis in the
drying room at Setsu Getsu Karou\! I scrambled to hire some downhill
skis and boots, which were skinny and heavy. My phone battery was about
to die, and I stood around waiting feeling stupid. We figured out that I
had gone to the wrong car park, and I jumped on the Gondola up to the
upper mountain section of the ski field. I skied down from the Gondola,
and finally met Yuki in her bright blue ski outfit. We didn't say much,
and she motioned for me to join her on the lift up to the top of the
mountain.

A few broken sentences were exchanged, and we jumped off the lift. I
followed Yuki through a gap in the fence, next to which were bright red
warning signs with Japanese writing. Wondering what I had gotten myself
into, we walked in silence with our skis slung over our shoulders up the
gentle incline and past the radio towers on the top of the hill. As you
clear the top, and walk around the abandoned Gondola station perched
above the cliff, a panoramic view of the ocean and the city of Sapporo
opens before you. As I stood there enthralled, Yuki already had her skis
on and dropped over the edge. I quickly scrambled after her, clunky with
my rental skis.

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20171229_102638.jpg", caption="Panoramic views of Sapporo from
Teine")}}

While not steep by world standards, Teine and its sidecountry area is
one of the steepest resorts in Hokkaido. And so it was, my first time on
rental downhill carving skis, following a stranger who was absolutely
fanging it on steep, tracked out off piste snow, no hesitation
whatsoever. She didn't even really look back to see if I was following.
I couldn't help but get the impression this was some kind of test. We
paused briefly at the top of a long gully. This, Yuki tells me, was the
old olympic men's slalom course. It was at this point I was really
missing my skis, I took several tumbles, apologising profusely to Yuki
who was often too far away to hear anyway\!

At the bottom, a long and fun traverse ensues to get back to the resort
slopes, winding around the hillside and dodging through trees. I'm ready
for a rest, but Yuki points at the lift and says "again\!".

I stayed with Yuki and her partner Masahiro at their appartment in
Sapporo, and they guided me around Rusutsu and Teine showing me many
favourite spots, undoubtedly learned after a lifetime skiing in the
area. Luckily our trip to Rusutsu enabled me to grab my skis again from
Setsu Getsu Karou, ready for a chest deep powder day. I'm very grateful
for their friendly company and their impressive hospitality. A couple of
days later, they left for Niseko, and I went to collect a hire car again
for the next stage of the journey.

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20171228_142816.jpg", caption="Masahiro at Rusustsu")}}

While collecting the car, I got a message from Sam. Sam and I had met
through a mutual online acquaintence. He was living in Niseko for the
season working in a ski store, and was super keen to get out backcountry
skiing. Earlier on the trip, we had been out to Chisenpuri in a storm
with an American named Jack, and had a brilliant day. So I was excited
when Sam mentioned he thought the weather would be good to make an
attempt at Yotei. I agreed, and quickly drove to meet him at Niseko that
evening. At his share house, we sketched out a plan, and told a friend
what we would be up to the next day. I attempted to fall asleep on the
couch, but the housemates were up for a late night, so I made a dash
back to the car to grab some shuteye before the next day's adventure.

In the morning, we drove the 10 minutes to the car park at the trailhead
on the North-East side of Yotei. Yotei is an impressive looking
stratovolcano which dominates the scenery for miles around. Climbing it
is a fantastic opportunity. Many people are gearing up in the car park,
this is the best weather we've had for weeks, and it also happens to be
New Year's Eve; today's adventure is a fitting celebration and
satisfying way to end 2017.

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20171231_080306.jpg", caption="Starting up Yotei (Photo by
Sam)")}}

Following a group of Norwegians who had left before us, I was thankful
for their tracks, but at the same time cursing how steep they were
taking them\! As we cleared the tree line, Sam and I took note of the
changing snow conditions. We were concerned about the possibility of a
wind slab, and decided to stop and dig a snow pit before we blindly
followed the others up the steep slope to the top.

The results were encouraging, but it was easy to see that just 20 meters
over, on the same aspect, the loading pattern in the gully was
different. We decided to stay up on the ridge. Every now and then we
would stop to take a brief rest and admire the surroundings, which were
truely breathtaking\!

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20171231_122028.jpg", caption="Verging on crampon
teritory")}}

Before reaching the top it was necessary to remove skis and bootpack the
last couple of hundred vertical meters. The firm snow was verging on
crampon territory and we were almost regretting not packing our crampons
for the day\! Sam was convinced on the way up that we should skip skiing
the crater because he needed to get back early for work, but one look
down from the top and the temptation was too great.

After returning from the bottom of the crater, we stood at the lip and
prepared for our run down to the carpark. It was at this point I should
have realised I had left part of my backpack nearby to collect on the
way back, but I forgot\! I guess somebody will find it in Spring. The
first couple of hundred meters were a little touch and go on the ice,
but as the snow improved, we were able to open up the throttle a little,
and fully enjoy then end of an epic New Year's Eve out on the hill. Sam
did a write-up on his blog about it, you can find here:
<http://www.forloveofthemountains.com/2018/01/01/mt-yotei-finishing-2017-well/>

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20171231_130105.jpg", caption="On the edge of the crater on top of Yotei with
Sam")}}

But that wasn't the end. Back in Niseko, I met up with Yuki and Masahiro
for the annual flaming torchlight skiing for the countdown to midnight.
They had very kindly invited me to join them in the formation for the
number 18. We hiked up the hill and got into position. The resort lights
were turned off. As the clock struck 12, we lit each other's torches and
made our way down the hill.

I got into the car at 1am and drove slowly and carefully back to Setsu
Getsu Karou in the moonlight. Inside, waiting next to the fire, Maiko
and a friend and guest Ken (visiting from Honshu), were welcomed me with
drinks in hand. We had a second celebration and stayed up late into the
night talking, drinking and listening to jazz on the record player.

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20180104_125258.jpg" caption="A brief stop at the Tomakomai City Science Center to check out the backup copy of the Russian Mir space station." ) }}

The final destination on my list was to check out the Tokachidake area.
Under the recommendation of Nii-san, I booked a couple of nights at the
North Star Lodge, run by a friend of his. This lodge is very pretty, but
well outside my usual budget. It was a last ditch ploy to try and find
someone willing to accompany me on a backcountry trip out to
Tokachidake. Luckily, after returning from a day skiing at Furano, a
family from the U.S who was also staying there overheard my questions
about ski partners, and very kindly offered to let me join them on the
next morning's adventure to Furanodake.

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20180106_134611.jpg", caption="Beautiful forest on
Furanodake")}}

The next morning the father was feeling sick, so they sent their 18 year
old son out with me (a total stranger more or less\!) for a backcountry
adventure. He had done a fair bit of skiing, but also surprising lacked
some basic knowledge about avalanche risk evaluation. I took at leaf out
of Nii-san's book and ran through a beacon search drill, each of us
taking turns to bury and find beacons. Here I was able to pass on some
of the tips from Nii-san, and reinforce my own learning, whilst also
getting to know what my new partner would be like under pressure.

After digging a snow pit and deciding that today would be a good day to
stick to the trees and avoid steep slopes, we made our way to just above
the tree-line. The snow surface gradually got icy as the wind picked up.
On our way down, I overshot our contour to traverse out to the creek we
had crossed on the way in. As we made our way back, I spotted a hand
line for a walking track and took my eye off the compass, assuming this
would take us to where we wanted to go. After a while, we found some
tracks and realised we had completed a circle\!

{{ img(path="photos/skiing-in-japan/20180106_145010.jpg", caption="Throw your skis over before crossing the
creek")}}

That afternoon we joined the rest of the family at the carpark. I went
skiing with their father (who was feeling better) in the trees above the
road, and finally returned to meet the family at the Onsen\! It was
cold, and the snow was falling into the hot pools outside, the end of
the last day skiing in Hokkaido.

I came to Japan not so much seeking good skiing, as seeking the
opportunity to meet new people; to see a different culture, and have
adventures. Don't get me wrong, the snow in Hokkaido is amazing\! But I
think if I had spent my entire holiday in Niseko or with my friends from
home (like so many foreigners who come to visit this snow covered
island), I may have missed the better part of the experience on offer.
