+++
title = "Cape Woolamai Mistakes"
date = 2018-08-08
slug = "cape-woolamai-mistakes"
gallery = "/photos/CapeWoolamaiMistakes"
banner_image = "/photos/CapeWoolamaiMistakes/14859586_10154034654863034_466160819_o.jpg"
[taxonomies]
categories = ["Adventures"]
tags = []
authors = ["Luke Frisken"]
+++

Following on from my previous article about mistakes, I feel like it's
finally time to write about what I feel has been my biggest series of
mistakes so far, this happened several years ago. Photos are from
various trips to Cape Woolamai over the years, no direct relation to the
people or the events in this article.

![Me climbing at Cape Woolamai (Photo Credit: Sam
Thompson)](/photos/CapeWoolamaiMistakes/14876052_10154034655383034_2107341556_o.jpg)

I had a friend who was new to climbing, they were very very keen to go
on their first outdoor climb at the first opportunity. I was heading to
Cape Woolamai for the second time with two other friends who were
experienced climbers. In the week leading up to the trip I sent this
message to that person:

> hey, so 4 of us are thinking of Woolamai, while there are some easy
> climbs there, it's also inherently a more risky place than somewhere
> like Arapiles, Werribie Gorge, or Mt Macedon due to loose rock and
> waves + tide. I'd be okay with you climbing with me, but just thought
> I'd better mention that so you're at least partially aware that it
> involves more risk than usual. There'll definitely be more chances
> during the holidays too. Anyway your call if you'd still like to come,
> I'm easy either way.

First mistake: don't offer to bring beginners to Cape Woolamai, it's not
an appropriate place for teaching new climbers, there are too many risks
involved and communication is difficult with the wind and the waves.

My head was in a strange place in the morning as we were driving to
Phillip Island, I was feeling excited and proud. I was not in a
headspace where I could admit my mistakes to my friends.

We walked in over the rocks along the coastline (rather than over the
top), maybe the one good decision for the day, it takes slightly longer
sometimes but it avoids the erosion present from people climbing down
from the lookout. I think everyone should be taking this route if they
wish to go climbing at Woolamai.

![Climbing at Cape
Woolamai](/photos/CapeWoolamaiMistakes/20161224_111142.jpg)

The place where we stopped was near a climb that my other two friends
wished to try. There were no easy climbs nearby, but I decided for some
strange reason that the grade 15 would be fine to do with my new
climber. To its credit, from the ground the climb looked fairly well
protected as far as Cape Woolamai goes.

As we are roping up my partner mentions this is the first time they have
done lead belaying. This is news to me, I had assumed they had practiced
this indoors. Another mistake: I should have made less assumptions about
their experience, they sounded confident when they were talking with me
about their climbing, but I didn't ask any questions.

Instead of stopping to think about the implications, I decide to
continue, it's only grade 15 I'm not going to fall right? Another
mistake. I'm thinking that I'm the only one who is taking a risk and I'm
stupidly willing to accept the risk. I don't consider that if my partner
drops me on a fall they will forever feel responsible for what is
essentially my mistake. I also fail to consider that this probably won't
be a fun climb for my partner's first outdoor experience.

![Climbing at Cape
Woolamai](/photos/CapeWoolamaiMistakes/20171118_131427_1.jpg)

Luckily experienced climbing friend is watching this unfold. As I place
the first few pieces of gear, and my partner fumbles with the belay, he
speaks up, he wants to at least hold the rope as a backup for me on this
climb, insisting that he isn't going to watch me kill myself
(paraphrasing here).

As I continue up the climb, I reach a crux point where there is a large
block, microwave or bar fridge size. It looks well attached, but I'm
still a little worried, Woolamai has a bad reputation. As my only other
piece of gear close to this point was a small cam placed sideways in a
flaring crack, I figured perhaps I should place a nut under the block. I
usually take the approach that if a block looks at all suspect, don't
use it as protection; "it's better to fall alone". In this case, aside
from some very slight misgivings about the block, the nut I had placed
as protection looked reliable.

I spent a long time thinking about this piece of gear, and pumped myself
out. As I went to pull past the block I yelled "watch me", and fell soon
after. I fell and the piece held, and more importantly, my friend was
holding the rope as a backup and perhaps saved my life.

I completed the climb and set up a belay on top. I had a lot of trouble
communicating with my partner due to the noise of the waves, and it took
them a long time to complete the climb. If there had been an issue
during their climb, or had a rock fallen on them, it would have been
difficult for me to notice without tying them off and rapelling down to
where I could get line of sight. And so the obvious makes itself clear
to me, when climbing with beginners, it is best to pick climbs where you
can belay with line of sight.

![Abseiling at Cape Woolamai (Photo Credit: Sam
Thompson)](/photos/CapeWoolamaiMistakes/14859586_10154034654863034_466160819_o.jpg)

When my partner got to the top, we walked over to the abseil. Many
abseils at Woolamai require exposed walking on loose rock, again not
appropriate for beginners. I think (but I can't remember for certain)
that at this point I decided to lower my partner down, perhaps finally
recognising that I had made mistakes and it was time to take things
conservatively. We made it down without any problems.

As we drove home I was incredibly embarrassed about my mistakes. I
talked about them a bit with my friend who had held the rope, but I did
not talk with my climbing partner.

## Seeing the Same Mistakes

Years later I was back at Woolamai for perhaps my 6th time (I really do
love the place\!), and I witnessed another climber making some of the
same mistakes. He was there with not one, but two complete beginners,
with two helmets between three people. I asked him why he had chosen to
go to Cape Woolamai for climbing rather than somewhere with better rock,
and he stated that it was a convenient location for where they lived.

As he was climbing, I talked with his two beginner friends. They seemed
rather impressed that he had been "mountaineering", and was very
experienced. I couldn't help but notice that all his climbing gear
looked brand new, coincidence perhaps. He had a strong accent so maybe
he bought new gear when he got to Australia? He also had no extenders,
and his rope was experiencing extreme drag.

The beginner belaying had his helmet sitting on the ground nearby.
Myself and my friend suggested that it would be a good idea to wear his
helmet because of the loose rock. He proceeded to take his hands off the
belay rope and put his helmet on, we watched mortified. Soon after a
bunch of loose bits come down the climb.

![Cape Woolamai
scenery](/photos/CapeWoolamaiMistakes/20171118_171549.jpg)

The climber reaches the top and takes a long time to build his anchor.
He has his beginner partners climb on toprope. While he his waiting for
his turn, one of the beginners positions himself under some climbers on
another route. He isn't wearing a helmet. I can hear the climber above
him sounding slightly distressed, and I suggest that he moves away, he
takes one step forward and a rock the almost the size of his head falls
and glances lightly off his back. My partner and I stare in disbelief,
the beginner has no idea how serious that could have been.

![Abseiling at Cape Woolamai (Photo Credit: Sam
Thompson)](/photos/CapeWoolamaiMistakes/14881215_10154034655508034_92862670_o.jpg)

We do our climb, and at the top we observe the sketchy toprope anchor.
As we make our way over to the descent, the climber from before climbs
up and dismantles his anchor and throws his rope down. He comes over to
us and we ask him how he is planning to get down without a rope, he says
he isn't sure, but he'll just climb down somehow. We watch him for a
minute as he tries to find a way down, and then we insist that he
descends with us on abseil, he gladly accepts the offer.

Watching someone else making some of the same mistakes is part of what
triggered me to write the last article. I went on soon after to finally
have a proper discussion/debrief from my beginner partner about that day
when I made my mistakes. I hope that by writing about it I can
internalise some of the lessons, and hopefully it may be of some benefit
to others. If you've had similar experiences, and you have the time,
please write about it too, I'm sure many people would benefit from the
learning available.
