+++
title = "Victorian Backcountry Festival 2018"
date = 2018-09-30
author = "Luke Frisken"
slug = "backcountry-festival-2018"
gallery = "{photo}BackcountryFestival2018"
image = "{photo}BackcountryFestival2018/20180901_124656.jpg"
+++

On September this year the inaugural Victorian Backcountry Festival was
held. There was a fantastic turnout, perhaps around 200 people. Along
with being a great opportunity to meet fellow enthusiasts, there were
many educational clinics and group tours run over the course of the
weekend.

Well done Cam Walker for organising this event and inspiring so many
people to get involved. When I found out about the festival, I decided
to volunteer to run a backcountry navigation clinic on Saturday morning.
My friend Guillaume kindly offered to help out. We had 10 people in
total, all very keen to learn essential skills for effective navigation
in off-track snow/white-out conditions.

![Running the Navigation Clinic (Photo: Guillaume
Stanguennec)](photos/BackcountryFestival2018/20180901_124656.jpg)

Some of the topics we covered in the 2 hours of theory and 1.5 hours of
practical outside:

  - Reading and understanding topographic maps
  - Identifying terrain features on a map
  - Methods for visualising terrain and slope angles
  - Compass navigation
  - How to plan a route, being conservative about avalanche danger
  - Slope angle measurment methods
  - Conservative (Aiming off) navigation using a compass and gps, the
    concept of catching features and terrain features you can follow.
  - How to use a compass to take bearings
  - Smart phone applications for navigation purposes
  - Navigation without a compass, orienting using the sun and snow/wind
    features (not really covered, I forgot to do this one\!)
  - Applications of an Altimeter for navigation

I spent a fair bit of time researching questions and methods I could use
to try and help keep everyone engaged, and understand where they were
coming from and what they wanted to learn. Unlike some other teaching I
have done in the past, this time it felt like it was getting close to
the right amount of content, and we were able to cover everything fairly
comfortably in the time that was available. Plenty of questions were
asked, and by the end it seemed like most people had grasped the basic
idea of compass navigation. However I still feel like a longer practical
component, perhaps a day tour with people planning their own navigation
and bearings would also be a valuable option for a future clinic. Maybe
next year...

![Skiing on Saturday afternoon (Photo: Guillaume
Stanguennec)](photos/BackcountryFestival2018/20180901_153758.jpg)

On Saturday afternoon after the clinic, I went out for a tour with Peter
(from BSAR) and Guillaume. The snow was shockingly similar to sloppy wet
concrete, but we still had fun.

On Saturday night, there was a series of talks, followed by some films,
presented in a room at the resort. I found the safety talk (by someone
from the MSC?) and the talk by a young woman and her experience getting
into the backcountry especially interesting.

That night after the talks and films, Guillaume and I headed out under
the stars towards Roper's Lookout to find a campsite. It has been a long
time since I skied with just the starlight, it is truely a wonderful
experience.

![Views out towards Spion Kopje (Photo: Guillaume
Stanguennec)](photos/BackcountryFestival2018/20180902_132907.jpg)

In the morning, we packed up the tent just in time to meet Peter again
for a day of touring with perfect weather, and a snow pack that had
firmed up overnight. Up at the top of the hill, there were some
fantastic views of Spion Kopje, and Mt Nelse. We did one run over that
side, which turned out to be surprisingly long between the trees. The
morning was getting into afternoon, and we decided to head back home,
taking a direct route with an interesting steep looking terrain feature
at the top. It was at this point that our party (no names\!) managed to
drop one ski, followed by another ski 20 minutes later\! Luckily they
were stopped by a ditch and didn't hit anybody or disappear into the
valley.

![Practicing some jump turns (Photo: Guillaume
Stanguennec)](photos/BackcountryFestival2018/20180902_141050.jpg)

The final run down the creek can only be described as exceedingly
enjoyable. The gaps between the snowgums were wide enough to really
crank on the speed around the corners. At the bottom, the snow bridge
over the creek had evidently collapsed, but there was still enough for
us to make it over without skis. We threw our skis across and struggled
to step over the creek between the bushes. Getting ready to ascend the
other side, putting skins on our skis, it became evident that a pair of
skins had gone missing, which had been stashed in the front of a jacket
for the descent. My stomach sank at the thought of us climbing back up
to look for it and getting back to Melbourne late, but luckily it was
found next to the creek, and we were all very happy about that\!
