Kamchatka in the Summer
=======================

:date: 2018-08-09 10:00
:author: Luke Frisken
:slug: adventures/kamchatka-summer-2018
:gallery: {photo}KamchatkaSummer2018
:image: {photo}KamchatkaSummer2018/.jpg
:dropcap: T
:status: draft

he Kamchatka Peninsula is a little known region of the world. When I
was telling friends and acquaintances that I was going there, I was
often met with puzzled looks. Russia is certainly not high on the travel
agenda for many Australians, and far Eastern Russia must be a fair bit
lower, despite Kamchatka almost being in the same time zone as us.

"A land of ice and fire", during winter Kamchatka's weather consists
of very low temperatures, and a huge amount of snow. There are <insert
here> active volcanos on Kamchatka, two of these will be erupting on
any given day. From a geological perspective, the vast wilderness
areas of Kamchatka are full of interesting discoveries. Kamchatka is
also full of interesting wildlife which tends to be more active during
the summer months, the Kamchatka Brown Bear being the most noteable
resident in the region.

Ever since seeing a photograph of a skier descending one of the many
large and aesthetically pleasing volcanos in Kamchatka a couple of
years ago, I have been drawn to the concept of visiting this
location. When I arrived back from Japan, I was still on a high from
skiing the stratovolcano Yotei <insert link> with Sam. My mind
immediately turned to planning a trip to Kamchatka and I spent the
month online seeking out someone with knowledge about skiing in
Kamchatka who could help me with the understanding the logistics, this
is how I met Anna.

Summer and Winter in Kamchatka are extremely different, and it is said
to be very much worth visiting the place during all seasons. To see
Kamchatka both sprouting in green, to see the brief golden Autumn and
to see it cloaked in white are worthwhile experiences. With Anna
returning to her home in Kamchatka to see family and work as a hiking
guide this summer, it was the perfect opportunity for me to go with
her and scope the place out in Summer.

During the planning and the trip itself I have learned that if you are
planning an independent, unguided trip to Kamchatka as a foreigner to
this part of Russia, there are two major challenges to overcome: Visa
and Transport. If you are to join one of the guided, all expenses
covered tours these things are not a big issue, but if you wish to
explore Kamchatka with your own itinerary, on your own budget, at your
own pace and with your own sense of adventure, there are more
challenges to overcome. Many of these are alleviated by having a
friend or contact living in Kamchatka who knows how things work over
there. I had Anna to help me for this trip. During my trip research I
heard good things about Martha Madsen
(https://www.explorekamchatka.com/index.html), an American expat
running a tourism business there.

The Journey There
-----------------

So, I jumped on a plane in Melbourne, spent some time in Hong Kong,
then arrived in Russia in the city of Vladivostok. In the airport I
was greeted by the sight of a fresh seafood store, something of a
novelty for me! The next flight was soon, and I rechecked my bag into
the domestic flight. As I was clearing security, a flight attendent
from Aeroflot approached me and handed me a business class ticket
saying I had been upgraded for free. On the plane I felt a little out
of place in my hiking clothes surrounded by Russian business people,
and a tired looking airline pilot doing his crossword in the seat next
to me. It was my first time travelling business class!

During the meals I forgot that I was sitting in a (comfortable)
airline seat and moved the seat forward spilling the drink and meal of
the passenger behind me. I looked back and apologised, he was a very
big and intimidating looking guy, possibly restrained by his partner,
saying something angry in Russian language. I faced forward again with
a red face and hoped it wouldn't make too much of a scene!

We got out of the plane parked on the tarmac at Yelizovo Airport and
stepped into the sunlight of a beautiful 25 degree, blue sky, summer's
day. The airport has many trees surrounding it, and the smell of
nature was immediately evident. The baggage collection at the time of
writing was in a tent style shelter near the terminal building. My bag
was almost the last bag to arrive, I was getting worried, but a pair
of boots going around on the conveyor belt provided some comic relief!
Once outside, Anna was standing alone waiting for me, and we caught
the bus together to Petropavalsk-Kamchatsky.

(Горели) Gorely Volcano
-------------------------

The first hike for the trip was a visit to Gorely volcano. From what I
could understand this trip was to consist mostly of people from
Kamchatka, they were joining together to form a trip to share the
transport costs and cook food for dinner together before driving home.

The concept of shared transport takes on a new meaning when travelling
and hiking in Kamchatka. Many groups opt to make use of the
colloquially named Вахтовка (Pronounced "Vahktovkha"), many of which
are available with drivers (perhaps like a taxi) in Kamchatka. This
vehicle gets its name from its use as a shift worker transport to
remote locations via difficult (or non-existant) roads. The chassis of
these vehicles is designed as a cargo transport with stiff suspension,
not always the most comfortable ride, but it gets you to your
location!

The road up to Gorely volcano only becomes accessible by truck in
summer. This road services the thermal power station, however the high
altitude means that it is covered with a very large amount of snow
during the winter months, and it takes a long time to melt out enough
to allow the easy passage of trucks. Even so, for our trip in July,
the last few kilometers were punctuated with sections of slow snow
driving.

Despite the entertainment of a particularly cute little dog, after 4
hours of bouncing around in the back everyone was relieved to step out
onto an island of tundra. I was very surprised to see this much snow
around in the middle of Summer! The flowers were out and the weather
was perfect, clear and calm.

We all wandered our way up the path, crossing large snow banks along
the way. At the top everyone milled around the spectacular
crater. Anna showed me a great video of a friend skiing into there and
across the lake! Occasional puffs of smoke could be seen drifting out
of the further crater, reminding me that this was indeed a real
volcano.

We slid our way down the snow, and made it back to the vehicles,
greeted by music and the smell of a chicken BBQ underway! The foreign
tourist group camped in small tents nearby, after apparently having
hiked to the location, didn't look entirely pleased about the effect
the party was having on their wilderness getaway.


(Толбачик) Tolbachik Volcano
------------------------------

By far the most anticipated adventure we had planned for the my visit,
was an excursion to Tolbachik Volcano. Anna had managed to secure a
free place for myself on a commercial trip by offering to be the
second guide and help with the cooking. Tolbachik is smack bang in the
middle of the Kamchatka Peninsula, a long drive north of
Petropavalsk-Kamchatsky

In the morning we met the group by the vehicle in the hotel
carpark. On the trip were three Russian Grandmas from Moscow, a
Russian couple in their 30s and a French family of five. Alexander the
lead guide, Sveta the cook, and the driver, who's name excapes me.
The French family had just arrived from Moscow, after having been to
the football world cup final. There were three children, a boy and two
girls aged between 14 and 18. Their eldest daughter spoke the best
English, and they all sat together on the back row of the truck.

So, we headed north, and made a brief stop in Сокоч (Sokoch), a town
with many roadside stores for travellers. At lunch we stopped at
Мильково (Mil'kovo), where a simple restaurant serves many travellers
and tourists food.

At some point we stopped for a toilet break after lunch, and it began
to dawn on me just how crazy the mosquitoes here get during summer. It
was insane: You couldn't do your business without getting a dozen
bites at least! Deet is a necessity here! On the road again, we spent
the next 5 minutes killing mosquitoes that had managed to get inside.

As the sun began to set, we found ourselves descending into a valley,
with the sides steepening, and the trees rising around us. Ессо (Esso)
was our destination for that night. It's a very beautiful area, and I
wish we could have spent more time there. The lodge we stayed at had
an outdoor spa, we waited until after dinner and the grandma's had
retired, then quickly jumped in before the mosquitoes devoured
us. Sveta snuck some champaign over to the spa, and the evening
settled.

The next day was the drive up to Tolbachik itself. During the previous
eruption the old road was apparently destroyed, and a new road,
significantly less smooth than the first, was cut out by 4WD'ers.  We
crossed a river at some point, and began to wind our way between the
trees and up the hill. Anna informed me that the grandmas were
complaining incessently about the road. A wall of old lava appeared on
the left, and we broke the tree line onto a barren plateau. It was
like we were suddenly driving on the moon, a stark contrast to the
green forest down below.

Tents were set up, and we set off again for a walk up one of the
nearby hills. One of the grandmas was really struggling up the steep
track and I stayed behind with her while the group marched on
ahead. She could speak some English, but her conversation was rather
interesting! From the top, the group was waiting by a hot vent, and
the view of the plateau and Tolbachik itself was an incredible array
of colours.

In the morning, we started on the track to the crater (lower summit)
of Tolbachik. After skirting the lava field from the recent eruption
for about an hour, we came across some red mice-like creatures, and
then headed out to cross the field. There was a tunnel with hot air
still blasting out of it, incredible to think that it was still so hot
after many years.

Upon reaching the other side, we crossed some packs of snow, with
strange shapes covered in volcanic dust. Anna commented, rightly so,
that it looked very much like tiramasu! The track gains a ridge, and
heads steeply up, then reaching a small basin. Anna tells me that the
Russian space agency performed moon landing simulations in this
location. I can certainly see why! It could easily be mistaken for
another planet.

The crater at the summit is something to be admired, it's reminiscent
Sarlacc pit in The Return of the Jedi, but x10! I was almost afraid to
look down into it.

On the way back, with the same grandma once again in tow, I was
informed by her that the clouds looked like silver serving spoons. As
she stopped and took photos of the rather normal looking clouds, I
couldn't help but feel like she was, despite all the complaining,
trying to savour the last moments on her trip of a lifetime.

(Вачкажец) Vatch Khazhets
-------------------------

After a few days resting in PK, and a fun night at the Harets Irish
Pub, we joined some of Anna's friends Vissarion, Alexandra, and
Nastia, and Odin the husky dog, for a trip to Вачкажец. Nastia picked
us up in a small four wheel drive and we headed up the highway. I had
come down with Tonsilitis the day before, but I didn't want to cancel
the trip. At Yelisovo, Alexandra and Anna procured me some interesting
looking black throat spray, I was a bit silly and complained about the
taste, but it worked very well, and I'm thankful to them.

Once we were off the main highway, we took a wrong turn, and soon
after, a bear jumped out on the road in front of us! Back on track,
the road steepended, and Nastia put the pedal to the metal as the car
bottomed out, banging and scratching its way up the hill. We all
jumped out of the car as she drove through a large puddle. Driving in
Kamchatka is certainly an interesting experience!

As we approached the destination, we passed a couple of armed park
guards with semiautomatic rifles. Seeing anyone with these kind of
weapons in Australia is uncommon, so that memory stuck with me.

Poor Odin wasn't a big fan of the driving, and spewed on the floor of
the car. He seemed to be cheering up with the prospects of beginning
the walk. We saddled packs, and made our way up the 4WD track, with a
small footpad crisscrossing between.

In the valley there is a beautiful lake, and we made camp next to a
picnic shelter. While collecting water with Vissarion at the stream
leading into the lake, Vissarion dropped one of his cooking pots, and
it bobbled down. Without thinking, I jumped in to try and save it, but
alas, I reached the lake with no success finding the pot. Everyone
seemed mortified that I had jumped in and gotten my boots wet, I will
admit that I did find this mildly amusing.

With tents and food behind, the climb up the valley continued. We
crossed a snow bridge to gain the waterfall. Odin chased after
Marmots, however they jumped into their holes, and I spotted a few,
they are very cute. Higher up, the views expanded, it's a stunning
place.

Back at camp, we prepared dinner. While one member of our group was
taking a pit stop, Odin decided to follow and dig it up and roll
around in it, he was promptly scolded and washed in the lake!
As evening fell, people let off the occasional firecracker/cap gun,
noise to scare away the bears, which are apparently quite common in
this area.

The moon rose between the hills, its reflection shimmering in the lake
with the stars. This was probably my favorite trip, despite being
sick, and having many emotions. It's great being with a group of fun
friends.

(Голубые озера) Blue Lakes
--------------------------

The final hike of my trip to Kamchatka was a day trip to a location
known as Blue Lakes. It is on the opposite side of the same mountain
range as Вачкажец. Anna and I caught the bus to Yelisovo and a taxi
down the short road out to the Gora Moroznaya ski resort to meet the
group we were hiking with.

From the resort the track runs parallel on the north bank of a
river. The green vegetation is up to our shoulders on either side, and
the guide for the trip made the occasional loud call to deter
bears. Along the way we were overtaken by a group of horse riders, it
looks like a lot of fun! They make their way through the valley off
the track.

At some point, the valley narrows and steepens, and we crossed the
river at a flat spot. Strangely, we watched a duckling float past and
plunge into the subsequent rapids, not sure what happened there! The
hiking from this point reminded me a bit of South West Tasmania, until
gaining the snow, and thereupon, the Blue Lakes themselves, cloaked in
fog.

Up on the hillside, we observed the horse riders approach from above,
evidently having taken a different route. On the opposite side, a bear
was ambling among the bushes. We sat for lunch and watched the
reflections in calm water.

Conclusion
----------

Almost a full year later as I sit here finishing this account, I still
dream about the majestic volcanos framed against the sky, the friendly
smiles, and fun with new friends. Kamchatka is vast, and full of so
many wild and stunningly beautiful places to explore, here you can
feel your horizons expanding. I can't wait to get back and join my new
friends, next time in Spring for some skiing!
