+++
title = "Ski Mountaineering in New Zealand"
date = 2019-09-19
slug = "ski-mountaineering-nz"
[taxonomies]
categories = ["Adventures"]
tags = []
authors = ["Luke Frisken"]
+++

The past couple of years I have set a goal for myself, to work towards
the prerequisites for the New Zealand Mountain Guides Association
(NZMGA) ski guiding course. With encouragement from mentors, and
inspiration from Stuart Hollaway who completed his IFMGA qualification
(NZMGA ski guide + NZMGA climbing guide) all while working as an English
teacher at a school in Melbourne, I decided to start down the long and
challenging journey of becoming a qualified guide, while continuing to
work in the field of software engineering, where my passion also lives.

In that time, the prerequisites for the course changed and the bar was
raised higher, however, the prerequisites continue to serve as yet
another excuse to get out on adventure. They are ample encouragement to
extend yourself and your abilities as a skier and as a competent
decision maker in serious mountain terrain.

And so it was that I needed to make a return to New Zealand for a second
Winter season, to gain experience skiing in glacieted terrain and on the
bigger mountains. I also planned to complete the entry level
professional avalanche course. Thinking to hit two birds with one stone
I applied for a couple of months off work, which was very kindly
granted, and began carefully planning for the trip.

## Ski Partners

One of the most difficult things to overcome in acheiving the
prerequisites for the NZMGA courses (or just ski mountaineering in
general) is finding reliable and quality partners for your trips. It
appears that some guides end up completing a number of trips by
themselves due to lack of partners. I like the margin of safety that
having at least one partner provides in the event of an emergency, and
having an extra head involved in decisions and discussions. I want to
try and avoid solo trips where possible. Having someone to share the
experience with and take photos of makes the whole thing a lot more fun
for me.

Finding people who can both ski and climb, have a similar fitness, want
to complete similar objectives, and have a similar approach to risk
management to yourself is extremely difficult, and almost impossible.
Personally, along with the usual criteria, I try to look for partners
who are happy to talk about the conditions and options before a trip,
are active in having difficult discussions about decisions during a
trip, and are willing to have a quality debrief after the trip.

## Mt Rolleston

Without having planned it, I happened to be on the same overnight flight
to Christchourch as my friend Sam Thompson. He was on a two week
holiday, with no solid plans for the first week, but plenty of equipment
for canyoning, skiing and caving\! We decided to return to Temple Basin
together, the land of the nutcracker and exciting terrain for the start
of our trip.

We made it up the hill to the lodge in the evening and cooked our dinner
after the catered meal was prepared and the kitchen was free. It's great
that we can cook our own meals here\!

In the morning, it was perfect weather, and the word was that today the
Temple Tow (or Uphill Tow?) would be extracted from the avalanche debris
from the previous storm and there would be some great snow on offer. I
dug some pits on a north aspect to see how the snowpack was doing for a
potential Mt Rolleston Otira Slide trip later in the week, it was not
yet fully stable, but with plenty of assistance warming from the sun
ongoing, it was looking promising.

In the afternoon everyone worked together to dig out the path between
the two main rope tows, and by the time we had finished, the upper tow
was repaired. By all accounts, it was an amazing day. Towards the end of
the afternoon, the sun was baking the North aspects, and triggered a
loose wet avalanche and a bunch of alarmingly large pinwheels onto the
ski slope, luckily not taking anyone out. The patrol announced that they
would have to stop soon, and hilariously many who had been chilling out
at the bottom jumped on the tow to get to the top before closure.

That evening, we returned to Athurs Pass and stayed at the NZAC lodge.
An acquaintance Andrea (who was introduced to me by the friendly and
knowledgable Joel O'Rourke) would be joining us soon for a trip up Rome
Ridge the next day. We also met a fellow Australian from Brisbane, who,
returning from a hike, was keen to join us for the start of the trip.
Oh, and I had forgotten my head-torch up at Temple Basin\!

We woke up at about 4am, and parked our cars in the little space for
Rome Ridge. We were the only ones out, and after climbing through the
trees for a bit, we soon discovered perhaps why. Plunging through thigh
deep powder snow up a steep ridgeline between the trees with skis on
your back, and phone torch in hand, isn't exactly type 1 fun\! The sun
had risen by the time we cleared the treeline, and a formidable wall of
fresh snow confrunted us. I found some extra energy somewhere and
started swimming up, one step up, three steps back.

As we neared a flat section of the ridge, there were some comments on
wind slab formation on the top. For some reason it didn't click in my
headthat if the wind had clearly been blowing the snow onto our side
(wind lip we just climbed through), then we had just been hiking up a
slope which was potentially wind slab prone (albeit a small one, and
mostly on a ridgeline).

Sam had decided that he wasn't going to take skis on this trip, so
Andrea and I had chosen to ditch our skins in order to stick together
with Sam. On the flat ridgeline, we quickly regretted that decision,
plugging steps was slow going, and it was very evident that we were not
going to make the summit before our turn-around time. Saying goodbye
first to our fellow Aussie, and then to Sam after lunch, Andrea and I
continued up while the others returned.

We reached a section where putting skis on and coming down seemed like
the right thing to do. Interestingly, all our group discussions the
previous evening about snow conditions had been for the climb up the
ridge and a descent down Otira Slide. I personally wasn't all that
confident in conditions on all aspects, the forecast for this area,
having only just spent one day in the area, and knowing that the
forecast probably only has observations from Temple Basin and an
extrapolation from the Cantebury Club fields to go by. There was clearly
plenty of wind slab activity on Easterly aspects visible from Temple
Basin, and Temple Basin itself had received a South-Westerly? slide
taking out the lift. It wasn't certain in my mind whether the two days
of good weather had been enough to make things stable.

And so it was that we found ourselves dropping in to good looking snow
on the South East aspect, with mainly a discussion about consequence,
and little about our confidence in the conditions. After a few good
turns, we returned to the ridgeline and quickly skied and bootpacked
back to the flat section with the wind lip before the final steep ridge.
There was some poking and a decision to do a ski cut across to the
ridge. A small wind slab was triggered, which the rider cleared, we
watched it tumble down the steep gully.

Just before the made the tree-line we caught up with Sam, and began the
crazy descent, sliding down the snow, ducking under trees, and hanging
onto roots, admiring the view that had been obscured in the morning
darkness.

In the cafe at Athurs Pass, we had a chat about our decisions during the
day, and I learned something about myself and about my partners. I'm
always thankful for these discussions, for open opinions and the
opportunity to learn and improve.

Back at the lodge, I was feeling wrecked, but another acquaintance,
Latham arrived from Christchurch, but with much of the hard work already
having been done, I was convinced to join him on another attempt the
next morning. Also climbing Rolleston the next day was a group,
including a beginner with his two acting teachers, very experienced
climbers in their 50's or 60's.

Latham and I started after the other group, and we caught up to them on
the final slope/ridge to the summit. The weather was perfect. The older
climbers were absolute crushers, especially the lady, who was pushing
forward and plugging steps as well as I could have done the previous
day. I was struggling to keep up.

Standing on top the lower peak, we glanced down the Crow Glacier, and
saw that avalanches had already flushed out the slopes we needed to
cross to go down that way, there had been some small discussion about
this option (instead of the Otira Slide) the night before. The Glacier
looked inviting, and after sending a message letting people know the
change of plans, we clicked in to descend via the Crow Valley, rather
than the Otira (where our second car was parked).

After a short sequence of events I watched Latham's ski ride down the
middle of the glacier, and joined him he made his way to its resting
place, lucky it didn't continue down the valley, thankful that we had
chosen to come this way instead of Otira where the consequences would
have likely been higher.

As we continued the descent, we traversed to the true right, and with
seracs on our left, the glacier funnels into a couple of tight gullies.
Running out of options, I decided to head down the most obvious chute,
hoping that it would lead to a good exit, but instead, struck hard ice,
and made the quickest transition to crampons I've ever done, quite aware
of the the overhead hazard in the funnel formed by the constriction. We
eventually found a different way down by climbing, and came out to the
valley floor where there were some impressive size 3-3.5 avalanche
debris piles.

The walk out down the Crow Valley was stunning, and I almost wish we had
planned to spend a night at Crow hut so we could have taken it at a
slower pace to enjoy the scenery. Crossing rivers in ski boots is
interesting\! The Waimakariri River Valley still had enough snow for
skiing, and we made our way back to the road mostly on skis under the
starlight. By the end we gave up trying to keep our feet dry and found
ourselves plunging through the final crossings with sloshing boots\!
Some of Latham's friends, two Italians Pietro and Alessandro, and an
Australian, Luke met us at the road to give us a ride back to our cars,
10pm, a 15 hour day.

## Avalanche Risk Management Course

10 weeks before arriving in New Zealand, I began the Avalanche Risk
Management Level 5 course through Otago Polytech. Our teacher for the
course was Andrew Hobbman (Hobbie), who's laugh was infectious in the
class, and a very friendly and knowledgable person. The online lessons
were thought provoking, and required a decent amount of study to
complete all the modules. It's almost shocking to learn that a similar
course was previously taught in a week along with the pracical lessons
and exams. I felt like the extended course made a big difference in our
knowledge retention.

After Rolleston, I made a drive down the West Coast in pouring rain to
begin the practical lessons and exams for the course. Our outdoor
sessions were conducted up at the Treble Cone ski resort. Everyone in
the class got on really well, and it was a fun experience with many
like-minded people. If future guiding courses are like this, I'm sure
they will be very memorable.

For anyone considering doing this course, I would say based on my
experience that it is only really worth doing the ARM L5 if you can see
yourself working in the industry, otherwise, the CAA AST2 course
provides more condensed practical knowledge and more practical learning
opportunities for those recreating in Avalanche terrain, it's also
probably less expensive.

## Symphony on Skis

While I was doing the course, plans were brewing within Latham's group
to undertake the famous Symphony in Skis traverse. This route travels
from the Godley Valley, over onto the Murchison Glacier, up the 
Murchison Headwall onto the Tasman Glacier, down the Tasman Glacier to
the Rudolf Glacier, across the Franz Josef Glacier, and finally down
The Fox Glacier, finishing at Chancellor Hut. 

 Karl who was in my
course was also part of a group planning to do the route at the same
time, and an idea was formed to travel the route in opposite directions
in order to do a car swap and avoid several days of hassle retrieving
vehicles. Latham's group would travel from the East to West, and Karl's
from the West to East. 

## West Coast Glaciers

The final adventure for this trip to New Zealand was to be a tour of the
Franz Josef and Fox Glaciers on the West Coast. Originally joining me
were my good friends Guillaume and Jack from Melbourne, we had spent
some time planning and practicing crevasse rescue before the trip, and
were very excited. After Rolleston I asked Andrea if she would like to
join us, as she had plenty of time, and was looking for people to do
more adventures with. This made us a party of four, which worked very
well, as Andrea and I were focussed on completing some ski
mountaineering objectives involving a little bit of climbing, whereas
Guillaume and Jack wanted to spend more time on skis.

We flew into Chancellor Hut with Fox Heliservices, and began the long
trek up to Newton Pass. Just before the trip, Jack had ingeniously
manufactured some plastic roll-up sleds, and they appeared to be working
very well, at least on the flatter sections. Traversing and steep
climbing looked a little awkward. They enabled us to take quite a bit of
food and live comfortably during the trip.

After gaining the pass in the afternoon, we skiied down onto the Franz
Josef Neve, laughing along the way as Jack and Guillaume struggled to
control their sleds, performing slingshot manuevers. The sun set just
before reaching Centennial Hut, our destination.

Staying with us in the hut was a party of 5, with guide Jane Morris from
Alpine Recreation, a party of 3 from Aspring Guides, and a party of 4
with guide Al Moore. For Guillaume and I it was quite amusing to meet Al
in the place after having done an avalanche course with him as our
teacher 2 years ago\!

With several previous days of warm weather, and no reported persistent
weak layer, things were looking optimistic for ticking off a number of
objectives, with a honking big high pressure system providing us with
several more days of good weather.

Day 2, we skied down from the hut together to the South, and split up.
Andrea and I climbed the South-East face of Aurora, and skiied the North
face. We opted to down climb a short section of ridge before dropping
into the face. Andrea took a line requiring a mandatory air to clear a
bergschrund, which she completed in style, I took a more conservative
line further left. We got a good view of Guillaume and Jack skiing down
from the Saddle just South of us.

Day 3, Jane's group left to complete the Symphony, they had been waiting
for the cloud out East to clear in the Rudolf. Andrea and I decided to
take advantage of this final day of perfect weather to ski the Minarets,
the most obvious big objective in the area. Guillaume and Jack headed on
over to ????.

We skinned up as far as we could on the South East face of the Minarets,
but eventually reached some icy crust where the ski crampon's weren't
feeling so secure, so we transitioned to crampons, also knowing that we
would have needed to anyway with the steepening terrain. We climbed
through a bergschrund, which was filled in, but there remained a steep
ice step of about 10m above it, and onto the top section of the face
with breakeable and uneven crust. In my mind there was no question of
skiing this section on that day.

It was just as exhilerating as the first time to reach the saddle once
again, and we walked the final few hundred meters to the summit proper.
The turns from the summit, with views of the entire park, East and West
were unforgettable, and hardly a breath of wind. We downclimbed the top
of the face and skied the rest, with the sun crust now softer and more
fun to ski.

We skied all the way down to meet the others returning from their
objective, and skinned back up to the hut all together.

Day 4, the hut had cleared out, and we were left to ourselves with
surprisingly good weather. We decided to stay on and weather the
incoming storm. A trip up to Graham Saddle and the Rudolf Glacier
rewarded us with the best snow for the whole trip, still fresh and
sheltered from the sun.

Day 5, the storm hit, wind blowing and shaking the hut a little, but not
enough to be exciting. We were too tired to go skiing anyway, but
Guillaume and Jack ventured out to practice some self arresting in front
of the hut.

Day 6, still storming, but by the evening the cloud cleared, and we were
gifted with the most incredible sunset I've ever seen. We did a lap down
in front of the hut.

Day 7, there were questions about stability, and what had happened to
the new snow, and how much new snow there had actually been. We were
considering several options for our exit the next day, potenially via
the Fritz Range flying from the Bauman, or over to Aylmer Hut. It's very
hard to judge conditions sitting in the hut, the wind blows the snow in
all directions in that location. We made some explorations in the
morning, heading towards Frenchay Col. Casually strolling along the flat
glacier, when, booooooom, a low pitched rumble spread out from all
around me in front, my stomach dropped through my pants, it was very
scary, first time hearing a proper whoomf. "Did you hear that?" a couple
of the others did. It happened again, and everyone was certain what it
was, a propogating failure in a weak layer of the snowpack.

We opted to avoid the potential avalanche terrain on Frenchay and
instead made our way back towards Newton Pass and dug some pits on both
the Northern and Southern aspects to investigate what had happened. What
we discovered was worrying, propogating weak layers on both aspects. On
the North Aspect we found facets under the buried sun crust, and on the
south Aspect we found a crust (perhaps rime) which was also sliding on
weaker snow underneath, possibly a mixture of graupel from the storm.

When we were on the South aspect just below Newton Saddle, we gathered
together to inspect a pit (dug on a section of the top of the slope less
than 30 degrees gradiet to be safe). The conclusion was that we were
were not even happy to ski down the way we had come up from Chancellor
hut. Before leaving, Jack asked Andrea to jump a couple of times just
above the pit with her skis. A now familiar but extremely scary rumble
and we felt the snow drop, really hit home how bad the conditions were\!
"God has spoken, I certainly won't be skiing this tomorrow".

We made it back to the hut early, with no acceptable options for skiing
out the next day we attempted to fly out that evening from the hut, but
the cloud closed in, necessitating us to fly out in the morning of Day
8. Of course we wouldn't complain about spending another beautiful
evening and morning up there in that special place.

During the trip I tried to make a habit of provoking discussions about
the conditions each morning, and I think we all did very well performing
our tranceiver checks, and talking about our decisions and plans. It was
a very satisfying trip in this regard. The main take-away for me was
that we needed 1L more liquid fuel for melting snow\! We took 1.8L for
Soto stove and two butane gas bottles. Thankfully the guide from
Aspiring Guides allowed us to use his spare fuel from their trip.

## Conclusion

So, I don't know when I will next be back in New Zealand. I love this
place, and the mountains are incredible, the people are friendly and
adventurous. The hiking through the trees and rivers up to the snowline
on some trips just adds to the overall feeling of wild, challenging
adventure. There are still many ski objectives I'd like to try there,
especially Mt Aspiring and Elie De Beaumont, maybe next time\!
