+++
title = "Emergency Satellite Communication Devices"
draft = true
+++

Generally the kinds of sporadic errors generally associated with GPS
are reduced greatly by averaging over a period of time. I'm not sure
how the internals of every PLB works, but I imagine the engineers
would be silly not to implement some form of averaging. Also as far as
I understand it, it's not a one shot signal, once activated, it
continues to send until the battery runs out, thus the GPS position
should continue to improve as the calculated positions are
averaged. Even if the unit itself is incapable of averaging, the
receivers/base station should be capable of this. A better comparison
would be creating a waypoint on your GPS unit using the averaging
feature. Another reason why keeping your PLB in a single location once
activated is important.

I think a PLB may also transmit on a frequency (wikipedia mentions
121.5MHz) which can be received and tracked for homing when an
aircraft/helicopter is in the area, the GPS position, however
erroneous should be capable I imagine of getting an aircraft close
enough to do a search pattern and pick up this signal for homing.

Should people spend several hundred extra dollars every year on an
InReach subscription, or should they do a wilderness first aid course,
a navigation course, and carry a PLB? I think ideally both, but what
should be the message to beginners? Regardless, I think that taking an
InReach (over or in addition to a PLB) should be a higher priority for
those without formal first-aid/rescue training, as the two way
communication should help prevent situations that may occur when an
inexperienced person unnecessarily activates a PLB, and when these
people fail to put in place effective plans with others for a
search/rescue scenario before they leave home.

A factor to consider is whether a having a PLB is technically legal in
your country or the country you will be travelling to, there also may
not be effective systems set up there to respond to an activated PLB
device. The InReach has some restrictions on its use, and may not work
at all in various countries/regions.
