Backcountry Skiing in New Zealand
======================================================================

:date: 2017-08-03 10:00
:author: Luke Frisken
:slug: adventures/skiing-in-new-zealand
:gallery: {photo}SkiingInNewZealand
:image: {photo}SkiingInNewZealand/20170724_130842.jpg
:dropcap: T

he aim was simple: do an avalanche course, and practice what we
learned. This was to be my first trip to New Zealand in winter, and
as such I didn't really know what to expect in terms of weather or
snow conditions. For the previous 6 months I had been working away
organising a group of friends to participate in an avalanche
course. We didn't want something too expensive/all expenses covered,
but rather were keen just to learn as much as we could so we would be
enabled to make our own informed choices in the backcountry.

I had a look around at various courses, and found the best candidate
visible online was the `4 day Aspiring Guides Backcountry Avalanche Course
<http://www.aspiringguides.com/aspiring-guides/ski/courses/backcountry-avalanche-course-msc.aspx>`_.
I thought back to when I did my TMC with a guide and remembered how
valuable it was to be able to talk with them about the trip and what
we wanted to get out of it. So I did a bit of searching for smaller
guiding companies who run avalanche courses, and `Anna Keeling's <http://www.annakeelingguiding.co.nz/>`_ name
hit the top of the list pretty quickly. I'd recognised her name from
some outdoors articles I'd read, especially those in the NZAC
publications. We exchanged some emails, and it was evident that doing
a course with her would be a good idea because we could focus on
exactly what we wanted to learn, she would have a good idea about our
abilities, and the course could be catered for us. The best part was
that it was probably going to cost less than any of the other
backcountry avalanche courses considering there were 8 of us
interested in participating.

Arrival
----------------------------------------------------------------------

On Friday we all departed from Melbourne on a red-eye flight to arrive
out at Christchurch international about 5am the next morning.

**TODO: Insert Photo Of Us At Airport Here**

Sam, Julian and myself were to be borrowing a friend's car which he
keeps on another friend's parent's property in Christchurch. The Dad,
who works at Christchurch airport very kindly offered to bring the car
to meet us in the morning, which was the same time when he started his
shift! So there it was sitting in the carpark at the airport. *"I've
had a little trouble starting the engine this morning, I think the
battery is a bit flat*" he said, an omen for interesting times to
come!

After a quick round up of shopping and visiting the outdoor stores,
we were on the way to Athurs pass. For quite a while I had had my eye
on the opening day at Temple Basin, and had convinced everyone that we
should book in Athurs pass at the NZAC accomodation in hope that they
may be open that weekend. But alas, without enough snow, Porters with
their snow makers was the only field in the area likely bo be open, so
we pulled in to Athur's pass feeling relaxed on a Saturday evening,
and checked out one of the waterfalls nearby.

Avalanche Course in the Cragieburn
----------------------------------------------------------------------

After a day at Porters, cruising the slope they had open, and a couple
of relaxing nights in Athurs pass, we had made the discovery that our
car was in dire need of a new battery. Every time we stopped, we were
scoping out a hill to park on to push start, joking that we might have
to do this the whole trip!

And so it was, that we parked the car on a slight incline out the
front of the comunity centre in Castle Hill village, and headed inside
for the first day of the avalanche course.

Anna Keeling was overseas, due back the next day, so we had Kem and Al
as our guides and teachers for the first day. The morning started
with a brief introduction, then straight out into the field. The
weather was due to close in, and it was looking unlikely that we would
be able to get out the next day.

So we drove to the nearby ski field of Mt Cheeseman. Al had procured a
key to the gate to allow us access, as the field had not yet opened
for the season. Driving up the track, I couldn't help but admire the
feeling that dark green trees on either side gives as the morning sun
shines through. It' s a very pretty part of New Zealand. Clearing the
tree line, there was one very steep section where we had to get out
and push.

Luckily, we didn't have to walk far to get to the snow, the cat track
had snow all the way to the carpark, despite the surrounding slopes
being completely bare.

As we got higher and onto the steeper slopes, Al outlined the
importance of seperation for safe travel while on avalanche terrain in
the backcountry, we kept a gap of 15-20m between us any time we were
on a slope steep enough to slide.

Reaching the top, it was amazing to see that the North facing slopes
had no snow at all! A quick lunch, and we made our way down the ridge
to a saddle. I was second last, and looking back I noticed Shree one
of our group members, a little hesitant, then, he plunged straight
down the ridge towards me, performing what my friend Dale would refer
to as "the snow plow of doom". Luckily for us, he pulled it off, and
stopped next to the group as though nothing had happened. I was
perhaps the only person to notice and I'm not sure yet what to
make of that performace!

Anyhow, next was the proper down hill. Al informed us that the slope
we were about to descend was 28 degrees at a maximum. Unlikely to
slide in most conditions. Someone was positioned to the side halfway
down the slope in order that we may have eyes on everybody all the
time to be able to respond quickly should there be any accident.

We stopped halfway down the slope to dig snow pits, and observe the
snow. Layers of facets on the surface and near the ground were
obvious. 10cm of snow on the surface easily slid on one of these beds
of facets. Not enough snow to be too worried now, but enough to be
concerned for the next snowfall which would introduce a large load on
top.

Following the snow pit shenanigans, we traversed the remainder of the
the slope to a section where we could boot pack back up and enter the
ski area once again. A couple of steep turns, and we were once again
near the base of Mt Cockayne ready to do some beacon search
practice. We each found a partner and took turns hiding and search for
our beacons while the guides watched our progress and made helpful
comments to enable our improvement.

The sun was beginning to hide behind the hills, and soon enough, it
was time for us to take the easy ride back to the car. Taking our skis
off near the car park, Kem, one of the guides realised he had left his
tranceiver buried during the demonstrations and had to rush all the
way back up the hill again to retrieve it!

That night we were to stay at Flock Hill in their backpacker's
accommodation. Tim the manager explained that "a big storm" was due to
hit that week, and it seemed likely we would be stuck there, possibly
without power, and he was happy for us to cancel. Perhaps he was
surprised at how excited we all were at the prospects of being stuck
in a snow storm. We explained we all had our own stoves and food for
snow camping so we would be able to cope just fine.

The next morning we were brought into Anna's house in the Castle Hill
village. The hall was being used by another group, and the impending
bad weather meant that the decision was made to hold the day's
precedings indoors. Kem and Al ran us through most of the theory
component of the course that day, with occasional breaks to take a
look outside at the changing weather, and conduct some more tranceiver
practice.

That evening, we had a great snow fight as big snow flakes covered
Flock Hill. A number of people pulled in during the night, taking
refuge from the storm as the roads became impassable. They obviously
didn't read the weather report, or decided to risk it. I'm sure the
tourists were on a schedule to get back to Christchurch for their
flight, and were very frustrated.

That morning Tim the manager paid us a visit to check how we were
doing. We were out on skis exploring the yard. He explained that all
the other occupants were unhappy to be there and complaining about
being stuck and he would be glad when they all left and it was just
us left again! He also informed us that we would be unable to reach
Castle Hill for our course that day, but that Anna (fresh arrived
from overseas), and Kem would try to drive to us over the snow
covered road with Kem's high clearance 4WD.

And so the final day of the course was also completed indoors, by the
comfort of a fire in Flock Hill. I honestly feel like we got a lot
more benefit out of being able to ask lots of questions, than being
distracted outdoors. After the course content they had prepared had
been covered, we quizzed Anna and Kem, asking for advice on our trip
plans. Sam, Julian and myself were talked out of our plan to ski the
glaciers, reason being that it is too early in the season, and not
enough snow to make strong snow bridges over the crevasses.

We spent that Wednesday evening, and the following day skiing up
around the hill out the back of Flock Hill while we waited for the
road to be cleared before we could continue on our adventure down
south. Some of the boys on the farm driving tractors in the snow
offered us tows up!

Car troubles and Dobson
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Friday morning, the roads were clear, and it was time for us to make
our getaway! Unfortunately the chances of us making a hill start on
the ice in the yard seemed remote, but luckily there were friendly
on the property there to help us jump start the car, and tow us out
through the snow to the road, where we had to once again push start
the car for reasons I can't remember!

The weather was stunning, and the transformation of the surrounding
landscape was complete as we headed back over the pass towards
Christchurch and down to Lake Tekapo. The discussion about the
conditions in the Cragieburn range was such that we were expecting
widespread natural avalanches with this big dump on top of the facets
which were evident on our trip up to Cheeseman. So we took the
opportunity to head on down south to where the conditions were
expected to be a bit safer and more conducive to backcountry
skiing. We planned to go and do a short tour in the Two Thumb Range
near Mt Dobson. The other car group had to make a detour to
Christchurch to drop off Shree, who had injured his knee skiing on a
tussock in Flock Hill.

My thoughts were that we could camp somewhere just near the trailhead
of the route in to Camp Stream hut. Little did we know, this was
actually still private property, and not part of the reserve! It was
very late by the time we arrived, and the road was firm and a bit
icy. We didn't have snow chains for our car (a big mistake, we decided
due to lack of time not to procure them in Christchurch). I was
skeptical that we would even be able to start again as we did a u-turn
and parked on the side of the road at the top of a little hill leading
down to a bridge. But we were too tired to think clearly, and jumped
out and put up our tent.

In the morning we were woken by a loud diesel tractor engine, and a
door slam. "You fellows alive in there?" shouts a friendly voice over
the motor. A few mumbles as we wake up serves as an answer. Again the
friendly voice: "It was minus 11 last night, you must be cold!", and
this time I replied "Thankfully we have warm sleeping bags, so we're
alright!". "I just need you fellas to move your car, it's in the way
of the snow plow, oh and by the way you're camped on my land", oh dear
what a mistake "Sorry sorry! we got confused!". "That's okay, but I do
need you to move your car". We sheepishly crawled out of the tent and
made our way over to the car. This was all the more embarassing have a
good idea about what was to come when we were to start the car. The
key turned and the motor hardly made a sound. The look of incredulity
grew on the farmer's face, "I'm sorry we have a flat battery! We'll
have to hill start it".

We gave the car a push, but the tires slipped, and the engine wouldn't
turn. We ended up getting into position to block the bridge. The
single lane road was the only way in or out of the area, a poor place
to fail to push start! The man grabbed a rope out of his tractor and
pulled us backwards to attempt a backwards push start, but again the
tires lacked the traction required. He jumped out, and walked over,
the look of incredulity still yet magnified. "You've got jumper
leads?" "No sorry". A grumble about pulling tourists out of his
property and that his cables were with his car, drove off with his
tractor to collect his car.

As he sets up for the jump start he asks us some more questions. "So
this is all very well, but you've got snow chains don't you?". A
couple of grins and head shakes."Ah yeah, and the battery, it's been
like that the whole trip" Sam helpfully added. Now he really thought
we were goofs (which we were)! He grinned as well and said "Look, you
guys look like you should know what you're doing but fucking hell, to
come here without snow chains, and with a dead battery, that's
crazy!". He couldn't believe how silly we were. We all agreed I think
and he sent us on our way.

In Tekapo we quickly found an auto repair shop to deal us a new
battery and some snow chains. It was getting close to mid-day and we
didn't feel like driving back to Roundhill, so we decided to head on
over to Dobson. On the drive up, we put our newly acquired snow chains
on, and the road steepened, another spectacular road to another
spectacular New Zealand ski field. Under some advice from a staff
member who passed us on the drive up, we parked at a large clearing
down the road from where the long line of cars began, near where a cat
track met the road. It felt so good to be able to turn off the engine
and know that it would turn on again without any fuss. We were
excited, while we munched on lunch we prepared our gear for the day's
ski.

The first run was up to the peak at the south end of the ridge from
Dobson Peak, with the weather station on top. We stuck to the low
angled slope, picking our way. Out of interest we dug a snow pit,
facing west on a small section which reached over 30 degrees
inclination. I forgot to record our observations or the avalanche
forecast for that day, but from what I can remember, the danger was
ranging from moderate to considerable. We were happy with the result
from that slope. Turning around before the slope got steeper, we had a
great run back to the car before walking up the cat track to the ski
field buildings, where all the crowds were located.

The ski patroller we talked to gave us a sideways glance and began to
interrogate us. "Why are you here so late?" "ah, long story". "Do you
have beacons and probes?" etc etc. He seemed skeptical, but eventually
have us some advice about a route up, and on our planned route to make
a circuit back to the car. While traversing beneath Dobson Peak on the
south side on what is usually a cat track (when there's no snow), I
decided to pull out the shovel again. There was a fair bit of new snow
here, quite a lot of it collected in drifts. We were considering
coming down from the peak at a similar aspect so it was a good
opportunity to see what was going on. The results were concerning. If
the terrain had been a little more serious, we would have been in a
silly position. This put any idea of skiing the south side of Dobson
peak out of our minds, and we continued over to the top of the
chairlift on the south side.

Here we ran into our skeptical ski patroller again. He seemed a little
surprised and thanked us, but did not consider the results unexpected,
saying that there had been a slide on this same slope before (taking
out a cat machine or something if I recall correctly?). Considering
how many people were walking across it, perhaps it was stable, but
having that many people testing didn't seem like the greatest idea to
me! And so we continued on our traverse of the ridge line to end up at
the weather station above our car. The wind was picking up, and we
sheltered behind an old fridge (what the heck was a fridge doing up
here?) while we took our skins off. Julian struck a rock with his skis
on the way down, but apart from that, it was an exciting and fun
descent.

Back at the car, I knew something was up when the central locking
didn't work. "That's strange!?". I turned the key in the ignition, no
response. Hands to the headlight control, and indeed the dial was
switched to on. Why hadn't the beeper warned me when we turned the car
off? Unreliable warning is much worse than no warning at all! So here
we were in a pickle once again. I'm sure the others were thinking I
was the silliest person in the world, being stuck there with a dead
battery once again for the second time today. We tried to flag down
passing cars as they left the ski field. Nobody had jumper
cables. Even the patroller passed us by, smiling smugly as if to say
"Hah! I knew all along you were idiots!". Faced with the prospect of
spending yet another cold night out next to our car with an
embarassing wake up, we opted to attempt a roll start, we had the
entire mountain after all!

As exciting as driving down a mountain with no power steering can be,
I was pretty drained by the time we rolled onto the flat, all our
restart attempts being unsuccessful. One by one, the cars trickled
past us, each shaking their heads in answer to our questions. Finally,
the last car stopped next to us. A dark 4WD van. A friendly a crew
with accents belonging to many countries, they were on a ski holiday
together. The driver said they might have something for us, and pulled
out an old looking jumper lead, which fell apart while handling it!
"Better than nothing!" we said, overjoyed. A few minutes later, with
power streaming into the battery I tried turning the key, but nothing
happened! Not a sound, not a light flickered, nothing!

Once again, the van crew came to our aid, they fished around in the
back of their vehicle and discovered a rather thin looking nylon
strap, and decided they could pull us to Fairlie, the nearest
town. The sun by this stage, had well and truely set. Without
functioning lights, we stuck our head torches in red mode in the boot,
and signalled for the pulling to begin. As we rounded perhaps the
third corner, the steering wheel suddenly locked, and the car lurched
suddenly into the ditch filled with snow, and began climbing the slope
above. We all screamed our heads out the window "STOP
STOP!". Eventually someone must have noticed our plight, because we
rolled to a stop. I was so thankful that the car had decided to head
left, up the hill, rather than right, down the hill!

After some head scratching, and a few times turning the ignition on
and off again, the steering appeared appeared to regain function and
we were on our way again, with a lot more caution! Our new friends
deposited us in Fairlie and continued on their way up to Fox Peak
where they were spending the night, even offering to take us there to
spend the night, but we insisted on staying in Fairly to hunt down a
mechanic in the morning.


Stuck in Fairly
---------------------------------------------------------------------



Mueller Hut Bivvy
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Climbing in the morning

muller hut leaving at lunch

we had talked to helicopter pilot day before


Ohau
---------------------------------------------------------------------


Wanaka
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Pisa Range
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Remarkables
----------------------------------------------------------------------


Temple Basin
----------------------------------------------------------------------
