Empathy and Criticism
=====================

:date: 2018-04-15 20:00
:author: Luke Frisken
:slug: adventures/empathy-and-criticism
:gallery: {photo}BlueMountainsCanyoning2018
:image: {photo}BlueMountainsCanyoning2018/20180331_142255.jpg
:dropcap: O
:status: draft

http://rockandice.com/climbing-news/remembering-savannah-buik/
https://www.reddit.com/r/climbing/comments/88780n/reconciling_risk/
https://annalouisek.wordpress.com/2017/07/19/persistent-weak-layers-can-lead-to-large-avalanches-a-warning/


My discussion with Channa.

The line between trying to identify mistakes and criticising them, and
being empathetic and respectful towards the person, accepting that we
ourselves are exposed to the same risks.

My ego gets in the way of my empathy. It blinds me to the risks I am
taking. It is easier to criticise other people's mistakes when they
have an accident than accept that many of the same risks and mistakes
apply to myself. It makes us feel better about our own choices. I'm
doing it differently therefore, I'm okay. Putting other people down to
raise ourselves up.

Insecurities.

We as a club need to improve this culture. Over the years I've
overheard or even participated several discussions which take this
tone. I've often left feeling guilty. This person often has an idea
that people are gossiping about their accident. They may feel excluded
from the conversation, and feel that other people look down upon them.

To add to this is the impression that perhaps sharing personal stories
of our poor decisions (especially those near misses) publicly with the
club damages the club's reputation by making our club look reckless
and dangerous. Perhaps it also feels like it will damage our prospects
for taking on future leadership roles? I don't speak for the committee
on this, but in my personal opinion, it is far better that we as a
club and as individual members have a reputation of being open,
honest, and willing to learn from our mistakes. Other clubs and
experienced adventurers may have a good looking public safety record,
but I can guarantee that they probably have had many problems,
accidents and near misses which go unreported, and undiscussed.

Yes it's important that we try to discourage out of place bravado,
poor technique or poorly thought out decisions regarding risk. But I
think we often aren't giving people enough credit and encouragement to
come to this conclusion themselves. Who better to criticise and share
details about an accident or a near miss than the person who was
themselves involved?

If you know someone, perhaps a friend who has had an accident or a
near miss. Talk to them about it if they are willing. Be empathetic,
be very careful to avoid implying judgement. They may feel shame, or
they may not even realise the full extent of their mistake, which is
why they have not told you about it themselves. Build up a rapport
with them on the subject, ask careful questions and help them to to
feel comfortable identifying and sharing their own mistakes.

To open the proceedings, a story about my own near miss, a couple of
weekends ago I was in a canyon with some friends. We were approaching
the end of the difficult sections and nearing the end of the canyon,
everyone was euphoric with the beauty of the surroundings. The final
obstacle to negotiate was a hand-over-hand fixed line down into a pool
of water. perhaps 5m below. I was feeling cocky, confident and happy,
I knew that this was going to be easy for me. I was also the last
person in the group and there was a friend watching out for me while
the others walked on ahead.

As I neared the top of the drop, I jumped up onto the edge and slipped
onto my bum. It was a 50/50 chance whether I would fall down, but
thankfully I did not. While the direct consequences of failure were
not dire (the pool was fairly deep), it still would have been very
possible for me to injure myself had I fallen, and extracting an
injured person from a canyon is sure to be a nightmare.

I should not have let my guard down, and I'm very thankful that my
friend was watching out for me should I have fallen and incapacitated
myself in the deep water and began to drown. This was is the often
unspoken and seemingly obvious policy while on outdoor trips with
friends, watching out for each other, up to the very last person, at
each obstacle. Never more clearly did the value of this policy make
itself clear to me.
