+++
title = "Spring in Kamchatka"
draft = true
+++

## Crossing the Kazbegi Border

March was rapidly approaching, and our visa-free year in the Republic of Georgia was coming to a close. With travel options being limited, our desire to see family, and for Anya to have a chance to work again in tourism, we opted to apply for a family visa for myself so we could return to Kamchatka for 3 months in Spring. We applied through the Russian visa centre in Tbilisi, which was surprisingly smooth, however they did take my passport for a few days which caused some inconvenience.

We planned to cross the Kazbegi border and take a domestic Russian flight to Kamchatka via Moscow, as this would be much less expensive and less prone to cancellations than the equivalent international route.

Leaving our car with our trusted friend Sopo in Tbilisi, we organised a ride to Stepantsminda, stayed in a super friendly guest house, and then a second ride in a local Delica taxi to the border. Out of the car about 50 meters from the checkpoint, we dragged our bags and skis to line up between the cars. This border obviously did not cater to foot traffic! We quickly passed inspection and entered no-man's land. Just as we were about the exit the Georgian border checkpoint area a soldier with a serious face and a serious gun stopped us from walking any further, informing us that the road with tunnels was impassable for us.

The only option remaining to us now was to hitch-hike the several remaining kilometers to the Russian border. With our thumbs up, several fully laden cars and trucks passed us by, some smiles, some frowns. Eventually a small track (known in Russian as a "Gazelle") stopped in front of us. A man with a friendly round face and a big smile stepped down and invited us to put our stuff in the back, which was empty after having delivered tea to Tbilisi. Anya sat in the front and I sat in the back.

We learned that his name was Alan, he was from Ossettia. He was proud of his new looking sound system, and was rocking some great Russian and Ossettian tunes, with the video screen in the centre console showcasing the latest music videos. I listened to he and Anya chatting about his life and family. Close to the Russian border we pulled to a stop behind a long traffic jam. At some point some desperate looking folks came knocking on our window to ask us to take some alcohol for them across the border (there is a limit per person). Alan showed us his passport, he had obviously made the crossing many times before for his work, it was filled with border stamps!

At the border, it became obvious that my crossing would be an unnusual event, there were very few foreigners like me making the crossing at this border now due to the COVID situation and the lack of tourist visas. Anya and I were taken for questioning in a room without windows, I felt immediately sorry for Alan who would now need to wait for us with our bags in his truck, he had already been waved through. The border guard puffed on his e-cigarette and asked pointed questions to Anya, there was no English translator available for me, so she did an admirable job. Eventually they were satisfied but not before taking the IME numbers of our phones, I was not even aware of the functionality to do that (entering a specific sequence of digits on the phone kepad reveals the number), it was quite a surprise.

Alan was still very kindly waiting for us after our hour long interview. He offered to continue to drive us to Vladikafkaz, the city where he lived. As the driving progressed we noticed that the line of trucks waiting to cross into Georgia was extremely long, it did not finish until we were almost in the city. Alan informed us that the drivers had been waiting for several months to make the crossing, which had been closed due to ice and avalanches blocking the high pass near Gudauri. There is currently a tunnel being constructed which should hopefully alleviate this problem in the future. It certainly does not seem like an easy life living on the side of the road in a truck cab for months at a time.

Alan very kindly dropped us off at our AirBnB for the night, but not before insisting that he would meet us later to take us out to dinner to taste the best Ossettian food in town. We couldn't refuse such an offer, and before long he rocked up in his Mercedes looking fresh and we joined him for an excellent dinner with Ossettian pies! In the morning Alan once again overwhelmed us with his generosity, bringing us another extremely tasty freshly baked pie that he had driven halfway across the city to obtain for us, before driving us to the airport. We hid some money under his jacket before jumping out, as he had already refused our attempts to renumerate him.

## Moscow Airport

The flight to Moscow was easy, but the airport shuttle to our hotel was non-existent, we spent several hours attempting to find it, without a working Russian sim card, and all the taxi prices were completely unreasonable for a 5 minute ride. We finally succumbed to an outrageously expensive taxi ride, only to learn at the hotel that we could have walked! Anya's friends Anya and Sveta were transitting through at the same time as us, on their way to a ski mountaineering competition. We met them in the terminal, there was much emotion, running and shouting, it was a happy reunion. They joined us in our hotel room to catch up, watch some videos and have a good time.

## Kamchatka Arrival

We landed in Yelisovo, Kamchatka in extreme snow storm conditions, our arrival was timed with the biggest (not by Kamchatka standards) storm of the season. I couldn't see anything out the window during touchdown! As the plane touched down, the chief flight attendant announced three times my name and that I needed to meet someone before exiting the aircraft, a little bit embarassing! At the door, a local policeman or FSB representative asked me why I was in Kamchatka, evidently foreigners were in short supply here also, and my coming was an unnusual event. We managed to provide a satisfactory answer, and he was very friendly. We met Anya's mum and her friend Natasha, Natasha drove us back to the city in her 4WD.

I was soon out touring in my favourite spot behind Krasnaya Sopka, every time I seem to have the forest to myself, and when it's cold enough the snow is often fantastic. The old trees on the hill are especially beautiful to pass between. One day I was out touring by myself when I met a guy named Artiom, who I had previously seen and briefly talked with in the resort having noticed his touring gear. He was out touring by himself before work as an engineer at the local coal power station at the bottom of the valley. We quickly joined forces and skied a new line on the Northen side, I'm still finding cool places within this small area!

A few days later I joined Artiom and his co-worker for a skitour at Nachiki. We made one run from the summit down the couloir into the half pipe creek, followed by several short and sweet forest runs. I met Alyssa and Slava for the first time. Anya had worked for them a previous summer season in their glamping buisiness Glampstory. Kamchatka locals, they had returned from a year living in Canada. I very much enjoyed their friendship, and we had some great discussions. Slava invited me on a trip north of Ganaly, a place that I would love to return to on a multi-day trip, the terrain is fantastic and perfect for a 1-2 night camping trip. It felt great to be making new friends and spending time exploring new places.

Meanwhile Anya had started working again for Kamchatka Freeride Community, it was very busy for her, and she often spent time away living at their base in Paratunka. We found ourselves often visiting Kish Mish, a restaurant with Armenian/Georgian quisine, perhaps our subconscious was already missing Georgia.

Life in Kamchatka appears to be on the up, new parks have been built, and the paved highway is being extended further North. Despite the world COVID situation and the lack of foreigners, tourism in Kamchatka is thriving, with Russians arriving in droves from Moscow (unable to holiday in Europe), and quite a few from London. There are rumours of a new world class ski resort being built near Viluchinsky.

## Heliskiing in Kamchatka

<DATE?> Anya decided to give me an extremely generous early birthday gift, she gave me a day of heliskiing with her company. We managed to pick what probably turned out to be the best day of the season, with stable snow conditions, perfect weather and a little bit of fresh snow still remaining especially on the Northern aspects. I deposited my backpack and picked up one of their avalanche airback backpacks and joined the group of tourists with Anya in the bus to the helicopter base. Anya informed me that she needed to obtain special permission for foreigners going heliskiing, and she had called the person who turned out to be the same man who had met me on the aircraft, he remembered us! It's one thing to watch an Mi-17 helicopter from the ground, but once you step inside you realise how large it is! The view is not good because everyone faces inwards while seated and the windows are small, I had no idea which direction we were flying. We jumped out of the helicopter very quickly and I was totally disoriented. It was the third day for this group, and they were all in a rhythm, starting to make their way down the mountain, meanwhile my touring ski poles had decided to freeze and I was unable to extend them, looking loke a total fool pulling them open with my feet!

The lead guide skied very quickly out onto the slope and managed to trip up on some rough snow, this took off the pressure to perform! After a couple of runs I began to realise where we were, Vachkhazhets! A place we had previously been hiking in during the Summer.

We worked our way up to the bigger terrain, eventually with a couple of runs from near the summit with perfect snow on 45 degree slopes. My legs were absolutely pumped after 8 runs, having had no chance to train in a resort for the entire season in Georgia, and took a few stacks near the end. In Kamchatka style, the bottom of the final run was greeted with a table of red caviar and champaigne.

On the flight back, the pilot decided to pull a zero G manuever, which was kept as a surprise! Skis and bodies flying everywhere, I was clinging to the bottom of my seat to stay in place!

It was great to finally see what heliskiing was all about and observe the guides who appeared to be operating very efficiently. I had a lot of fun, and am super thankful to my wonderful wife for the amazing gift! It was also very fast paced and a little overwhelming, perhaps I could grow accostomed to this, but I think that I still personally prefer having more time to enjoy the scenery, and saving the use of aircraft as an aid for a multi-day ski tour or expedition (such as a bump up the Fox or Tasman Glaciers in New Zealand or a flight to a remote area, where the cost (both in dollars and environmentally) is slightly more justified. All that being said, it was an amazing day, and I would have difficulty saying that a visitor to Kamchatka should altogether avoid heli skiing there!

## Ganaly

Our friend Alexei had been busy working as a heli-ski guide for Snow Valley, and I had been thoroughly looking forward to going on another trip with him after our fantastic adventure on Kozelsky together the previous season. I was very excited when he invited Anya and I to join him on a trip to Ganaly. This was a place that I had been longing to visit since the day I had first researched skiing in Kamchatka, for reasons that will be clearly evident in the photographs, the terrain is spectacular, especially "the finger" feature (**TODO** name in Russian), a spire of rock which sticks out at an unnatural angle.

Alexei picked me up from our apartment in his car, with him was Misha, and Misha's dog. On the road we met with Dima and Yevgeny (**TODO name?**), they had a snow mobile in tow. Parked on the side of the road. Dima and I were towed behind the snow mobile for the first 5 or so kilometers for flat, we then began touring while the snow mobile returned to pick up Alexei and the rest of the luggage.

While we were touring we got a message on the radio that misadventure had befallen the other party, the snow was now too soft and Alexei's ski had snapped during a trailer roll-over. It was at about this point that Dima and Misha's dogs began fighting, with blood pouring out on the snow, this trip was not off to a good start! Dima who was to be making a video about the trip documented every second of drama on his gopro, much to my amusement. We dropped our packs and returned to meet the others. Alexei was in good spirits despite the loss of a ski. Yevgeny had decided to return to the city with his snow mobile due to the snow conditions, however Alexei was able to take his skis and boots, the boots did not fit very well but he managed to put them on, and we were able to continue the trip. Everyone had brought extra stuff due to the reliance on the snow mobile, requiring a repack!

As we neared the corner of the valley with the turn to Ganaly we observed bear footprints, the first time I had seen them in the snow. We were making slow progress, it was clear that the boots did not fit Alexei very well, but he was bravely soldiering on. Sunset came and we found a campsite not far from the beautiful ridgeline. It was immediately obvious which line I wanted to ski, to the right of the finger is a stunning couloir that snakes its way down right from the top, consistently steep, with a great looking saddle with a view to the other side at the top.

The next morning Misha, Alexei and I decided that we would climb the aforementioned couloir, Dima would stand and take photos/video from afar with a long lens. We weren't in a big hurry because the snow surface was frozen solid, and it would be some time before the couloir would melt out. Soon we were in crampon territory, the steepest (about 50 degrees) most technical part of the constriction was uneven and very icy as we passed it, this made me a bit nervous about the descent.

Misha and I created a nice sheletered lunch spot on the saddle while we waited in the sun for Alexei to punch on up. We munched on cheese and Sala, while the snow slowly melted. I contemplated the descent, I was expecting the most difficult section to remain in the shade, the high consequences of the terrain made me nervous. I was the first to start on skis, something just wasn't feeling right and I decided after descending about 20m to switch over to crampons for the steepest section. I watched Misha slide by on his snow board and perform a mini self arrest, the snow was just on the edge of being safe.

## Orienteering



## Viluchinsky Pass


