+++
title = "A Year In Georgia"
date = 2020-04-12
slug = "a-year-in-georgia"
[taxonomies]
categories = ["Adventures"]
tags = ["Georgia", "Skiing", "Mountaineering"]
authors = ["Luke Frisken"]
[extra]
map = true
gallery = "photos/a-year-in-georgia"
banner_image = "photos/a-year-in-georgia/.jpg"
+++

In March 2020, my 3 months in Kamchatka was coming to an end, unable
to extend my Russian visa, we opted for plan B, living for some time
in Georgia, as both Anya and I could stay there for up to a year. With
a heartwarming send-off at the airport from our Kamchatka friends, we
loaded our clothes and skis into a plane in Yelisova airport, and flew
8 hours to Moscow.

I had been watching the global pandemic unfold with one eye on the
news, hoping that we would not be too late to enter
Georgia. Unfortunately we had a number of important errands to run in
Moscow which could not be skipped. One morning, about 5 days into our
stay in Moscow, our friend Taylor (who lives in Georgia), gave us the
notice that the borders would be closing in 2 days. This was before
our flight was scheduled!

We frantically rushed around the city visiting translators, collecting
documents, all the while I took my laptop out in the taxi and
attempted to book new tickets and to cancel our previous tickets on an
airline website which was struggling with all the panicking
customers. This was probably the most stressful day of my life. In the
end we completed all tasks, and were sitting in a Moscow traffic jam
with the clock counting down for our flight. The map revealed that the
express train for the airport was not far, and we quickly changed
course, and rushed with skis, bags and all into the train station and
purchased a ticket for the next train. We bustled through the terminal
with the train pulling onto the platform one minute later. We later
calculated that if we had missed that train we would have missed our
flight, and probably our chance to go to Georgia. We are constantly
thankful to Taylor for pressing us to go early!

Our flight to Georgia was via Turkey, it required a change of
airlines, and a re-check-in of our bags. The Turkish border control
the officials were rather relaxed at the late hour, amusingly they
seemed more interested in their phones than potential COVID laden
passengers entering their country, but we couldn't complain, the
airport lounge was very comfortable. Upon arrival in a snow covered
Tbilisi, we were greeted by people in white suits performing thermal
scans, thankfully we passed, and we quickly scrambled our way to
Gudauri.

## Lockdown in Gudauri

For the first few days in Gudauri we stayed in a small guest
house. Some guests from Japan and some guests from Urkraine were
staying with us, but we got the impression that with the resort being
closed, any remaining tourists would be leaving soon, and all guest
houses would be closing. 

We visited Taylor and met with his Vagabond ski instructor crew, most
of whom had decided to stay put in Gudauri for a Spring of ski
touring! Anya and I found an apartment in the same block with them,
and we moved in to the community of ski bums suriviving the
apocolypse, ski touring during the day and celebrating in the
evenings. One evening our Georgian friends Sopo and Kato taught us how
to make Khinkali, and another evening we celebrated half-year American
Thanksgiving. Among us were people from Georgia, America, Italy,
Poland, Czech Republic, Germany, Russia and Australia.

TODO: insert ski touring Narvani Valley video.

Unfortunately the bed in our apartment was extremely saggy and we were
sleeping on the floor instead, but with all the tourists leaving we
managed to find a good deal with an apartment in New Gudauri. We spent
a day shuttling our luggage in backpacks up the hill on skis.

In New Gudauri, a litter of about 8, extremely fluffy puppies
appeared, and became the entertainment of the children wandering
between empty ski town streets, we often stopped to cuddle. We were
outside with the puppies, talking with one of the building security
guards, watching the children run around with them, when the police
drove past and blurted something out of their speakers on the car roof
presumably telling the "crowd" to dispurse. The security guard said
something to the degree of "piss off" in Russian under his breath, and
we had to smirk, the police drove on and the scene continued as
before.

Some of the Ukrainian Gudauri residents built the puppies a shelter
next to our apartment building, but an army of security guards soon
marched past our window (followed by many onlookers) to remove it!

TODO: insert photo cute puppies

While walking up the hill for a day of skiing we met Alex, an excited
Frenchman towing his snowboard up the hill on a rope, who had remained
in Gudauri with his partner Lena from Russia. We later spent several
fun evenings trying out various Georgian supermarket wines with them
before sneaking back home to our apartment after curfew.

## A Wedding in Gomi

The Vagabond group decided to leave Guduari to live on a property in
the tiny town of Gomi, in the Guria region, near Ozergheti. They would
be helping a friend Lika to build a campsite called Dumbo Eco
Camp. After a short stay in Tbilisi, and quick visit to the Black Sea
near Kobuleti with Alex and Lena, we joined the group in Guria,
sleeping in our small tent under the hazlenut groves next to the
river. It's warm and humid in Guria, with a thunderstorm being a
common occurance in the evenings during Summer. I loved walking in
barefoot on the grass, and swimming in the cold river with our
friends.

A local, Lasha invited us over for a lavish Georgian supra a number of
times. We watched the ducks swimming around in his ponds, and the
chickens being bred nearby. He peppered us with gifts in what probably
turned out to be an attempt to find some people to run his new guest
house. We were all rather intrigued by his purpose, and he gifted us a
number of antique sewing machines! We visited the honey guy, who
appeared very comical, and very drunk on honey chacha. We caught some
dogs rummaging around our trash and breaking into the compost bin, one
of whom was the beatiful, and crazy Bobic, who we all came to love and
hate, a major character of the Gomi story.

TODO: photo of Bobic

Some of our friends began to make plans to leave Georgia and return to
Europe. Anya and I had organised to be married in Moscow, however due
to the unravelling COVID situation it became clear that we could not
follow that plan. Sitting at the table with all our friends, we
decided that we could just make a wedding in 3 days, Lika was a
wedding planner after all and she declared it was possible! Before we
knew what was happening we had booked for our marriage at the service
hall, and planned an informal ceremony to take place on top of the
nearby Gomi mountain. We invited our family and friends to join us on
a Zoom video call, someone said they had an internet connection on the
mountain, but we had no time to test the theory!

Anya spent her bachelorette's party the next day in Batumi with the
girls, and I joined the guys for dinner at a restaurant in the hills
behind Batumi, and we carried our sleeping stuff down to a beautiful
beach near Tsikhisdziri. We were invited over to the campsite of a
group of free spirits living on the beach in makeshift tents, and
beautiful cups and table made from bamboo cut from the nearby
forest. One of the beach residents was a young man from Turkmenistan,
who told us many intriguing and sad stories about life in that
country, including how he was unable to return without facing
consequences because he had spent too much time abroad!  When we woke
up in the morning with the sun, we ate a watermelon for breakfast, and
watched our new friends dive naked into the waves.

The dress that Anya had ordered from Russia for our originally planned
wedding had not arrived in Georgia after 3 months of shipping time, it
was stuck somewhere on the border, so Anya rushed around Batumi at the
last minute with Eva trying to find something that would work. We were
unable to find wedding rings in Batumi, so I spent the afternoon
fashioning some out of bamboo from the campsite.

In the morning some of our friends appeared with beautiful flowers
from town, and two Mitsubishi Delicas rolled through the gate to take
us up the rocky Gomi Mountain road. Halfway up we paused to drink some
wine offered to us by the drivers and to give carsick Diana a break
from the hectic road! We were approaching the cloud, and I was nervous
that our wedding might have no view, but we broke through into the sun
and it was an incredible and surreal feeling. The view opened up, the
rolling green hills, and the ramshackle village of Gomi Mountain, all
floating above the clouds extending in every direction.

We reached the cross at the top of the mountain, but the mobile
reception there was very poor, I was worried we would be unable to
conduct the zoom call. So Taylor and I ran off barefoot down a different side
hill to see if we could find something better, but nothing better
could be found. I returned stressed and sweaty, Anya also was feeling
nervous. Thankfully her phone must have a better antenna, and managed
to get just enough signal for a video call, so we decided to set up
just below the cross.

Our friend Chris performed the ceremony, he is a great orator. The
cloud drifted in and out, and I watched Anya's beatiful face gather
droplets. Afterwards we cracked the champaign and partied! As we drove
down the mountain, I received a text message that our wedding
certificate was ready to be collected at the service hall, so Anya and
I continued there with our two Georgian friends Sopo and Lika as
witnesses, a small miracle it was ready on the same day as the
ceremony.

I drove with Lika to collect the wedding cake she had organised to be
made for us, something delicious covered in stawberries. We were soon
all sitting for dinner at the newly made table under the shelter in
the campsite. Two Gomi locals Anzori and TODO: name, brought us
another cake and fireworks as gifts. We spent our first married
night sleeping on a small couch out on the veranda of the house, and
the rain absolutely bucketed down during the night, spraying me on the
outside.

The next day we got a lift into Ozergheti, and took a marshutka (mini
bus) to the Black Sea, where we took advantage of COVID prices and
stayed in a luxury 5 star hotel above the beach which resembles a
disney castle with an infinity pool. Walking down the road to reach
the hotel, we passed many stunning Eucalyptus specimens, this region
is full of them, and it reminded me of home.

## Climbing on an empty Kazbek

During our time in Gomi a few of us talked about a summer climb of
Kazbek, one of the most notable peaks in Georgia. Taylor, Eva, Arina
and myself committed to the endeavour, they managed to scrounge
together the climbing specific gear required, and we loaded up in
Taylor's van for the drive over Gudauri to Stepantsminda. Anya stayed
in Tbilisi during this time. With us were a box of bagels provided to
us by a friendly Australian who started a bagel baking business in
Tbilisi. Not sure if it was the bagels, but at some point during the
drive we all began to experience flatulence which would set the tone
for the trip!

TODO: insert photo of guy at the pass

We spent the night in a guest house in Stepantsminta, and in the
morning we drove up to the trailhead. The typically busy carpark was
now occupied by pack horses being loaded up with hut construction
material. The hike out of the valley is mellow and enjoyable, and
before we knew it, we had a view of the Gergeti glacier. We opted to
walk up the rocks to the left of the white ice toe of the glacier
before crossing it to reach Meteostation. Probably next time I would
choose to just don crampons and climb the ice, as there were no
significant obstacles on the glacier itself, and it's tough work
climbing sliding rocks with blue ice hidden underneath.

TODO: insert photo of Meteostation

The Meteostation building is huge, and the number of campsites there
is difficult to count, and it was completely empty! We were clearly
lucky to have this opportunity to have the mountain to ourselves in
Summer. We set up our tents, and the building manager invited us into
his room for tea, and we spent the evening watching Lord of the Rings
dubbed in Georgian. During the night Taylor's tent was ripped open by
a cheeky camp fox in search of bagels.

On day 2 we went for an acclimitazation hike up to 4000m, luckily this
also allowed us to plug steps in the now soft snow drifts which lay
across the path. On day 3 we woke up very early, sometime around 4am
or earlier, and hiked out of camp. Our previous day's steps were very
useful in the now icey snow drifts, and we soon reached the point of
the glacier at around 4000m where we stepped onto the snow of the
glacier and roped up. We walked slowly up to the saddle between
Spartak and Kazbek at 4450m. Here it became clear that Arina was not
going to be able to continue, she was feeling sick from the altitude,
we probably needed to spend more time acclimatizing. I was still full
of energy, and I requested 1.5h to make a solo dash to the
summit. Ahead of us high up on the mountain a group from the Russian
side were almost at the summit, unfortunately there were no tracks
from our side to follow. I was plugging through fresh snow and only
made it to a large crevasse with a small snow bridge at about 4880m
just below the ridge to the summit before having to turn around, I was
out of time anyway.

TODO: insert photo of arina at saddle
TODO: insert photo of Taylor spartak bagels

Meanwhile Taylor and Eva conquered Spartak, and we all met again in
the saddle with Arina. As we were walking down, the skies opened up
with sleet and the wind began to howl. Taylor's tent pole snapped in
the wind. We were glad that we had turned around early. The next
morning Taylor and Eva decided they wanted to make another summit
attempt, Arina and I would walk down together as I needed to return to
civilization earlier for work. I was awoken before sunrise by
Taylor. They had already returned, Eva overcome with stomach problems
early into their attempt. Instead we all took our sleeping bags and
cooking stuff to a nearby ridge and cooked breakfast salami while
watching the sun rise.

## Lockdown in Mestia

After the Kazbek trip Anya and I decided we would travel to Mestia to
live there for some time during the Summer.

## Climbing on Tetnuldi



## Paragliding Course above Tbilisi



## Winter in Bakuriani


